
Title: Eli5 How did all the landmass fit together for Gondwana when land is attached to continents (instead of floating on water)?
Author: daveydizzl
Score: 1
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18sjps7/eli5_how_did_all_the_landmass_fit_together_for/
  This post has 0 comments.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: At intersections with traffic lights what is the advantage of only letting one direction of cars go at a time instead of letting opposing directions go at the same time?
Author: cbarabcub
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18sjlk6/eli5_at_intersections_with_traffic_lights_what_is/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by favorite_sardine: was there a green arrow or other crossing from the same direction?

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5 How do Loctite and similar epoxies bind so fast while other glues take several minutes?
Author: Particular-Cry-778
Score: 1
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18sji25/eli5_how_do_loctite_and_similar_epoxies_bind_so/
  This post has 0 comments.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Why does running feel so exhausting if it burns so few calories?
Author: Rusiano
Score: 6
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18sjfdn/eli5_why_does_running_feel_so_exhausting_if_it/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by sharkweekk: On the other hand, 100 calories in 10 minutes is quite a lot if you’re eating foraged berries and roots instead of Oreos and pasta with butter-heavy sauces.
  Comment by slow_cars_fast: Because we're all so incredibly out of shape and probably the majority of people don't run efficiently. We assume because we can run, we know how to run.
  Comment by UghKakis: Generally, a mile burns 100 calories. If someone is running a mile in 10 minutes, they are simply not in shape so of course it will feel hard. 

When I was in better shape, I would run 8 minute miles for as long as I wanted basically. One hour for about 800 calories is great

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5 Tesla vehicle add to tesla account
Author: jls835
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18sj852/eli5_tesla_vehicle_add_to_tesla_account/
  This post has 0 comments.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: What happens inside the "injury tent" on the sidelines of college and NFL football games and why is it necessary?
Author: JhopkinsWA
Score: 4
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18siy3g/eli5_what_happens_inside_the_injury_tent_on_the/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by imtalkintou: Answer: It's for the privacy of the athletes. No one but the player and the sidelines doctor/trainer needs to know what is going on inside the tent.
  Comment by gollumaniac: Privacy. Medical staff can perform quick evaluations and determine if the player can go back into the game or if more detailed exam and treatment is needed, at which case they can make the longer trip to the locker room.
  Comment by JhopkinsWA: They've only been in use for five or six years. Did no one think of privacy before that?
  Comment by draftstone: They often went to the locker room but it took time to go and come back. Now they can be checked faster and quicker. Very easy solution!
  Comment by imtalkintou: Did they think of it, yes probably. Did anyone care? Not as much as they should have. 

I wouldn't be surprised if it was part of the negotiation of one of their recent contracts.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: eli5: why can't we upgrade most laptops' CPUs and GPUs?
Author: 144i
Score: 5
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18sigc7/eli5_why_cant_we_upgrade_most_laptops_cpus_and/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Xelopheris: A desktop computer is intentionally modular to allow components to be replaced. A laptop computer is not modular so that it can be optimized for the limited space it has.

There are some laptops made to have interchangeable parts, like https://frame.work/, but they are the exception rather than the rule. Even then, they have given themselves serious design constraints for how pieces must fit together, and you are limited to doing things like whole mainboard upgrades.
  Comment by draftstone: One of the factor is space/thickness. For instance in a desktop computer you have a socket soldered to the motherboard for the CPU and a PCI-E slot soldered to the motherboard for the gpu. In a thin laptop, saving the 5mm of height of the cpu socket and soldering the cpu directly on the motherboard makes sense. Also, instead of plugging the gpu you solder the gpu and the vram on the motherboard saves yet more thickness. And then, since everything is soldered you can have a custom cooling solution that is made to not be removable so it will create better colling for a small enclosure. Any laptop company could make a laptop as modular as a desktop computer, but to get the same efficiency it would need to be thicker and heavier and in the past, people vastly bought thinner and lighter laptops over bulkier ones, so now weight and size are the primary concerns for 99% of laptops being built.
  Comment by Nosensensatall: Mostly, Consumerism- it's not in computer companies best interests to allow you to do that, when they could just make you buy a whole new device.

That said, laptop components are specifically designed to be small. Every part of a laptop meshes together like a jigsaw, so they're nowhere near as cross compatible as pc parts and they're also harder to install because you have to pry out ten other different things first. It's not particularly consumer accessible and therefore the cost to create a store front for those individualised parts wouldn't make sense for most companies, because so few people would use them.

So still consumerism, but slightly less cynical consumerism?

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Why Can Children Under 2 Fly On A Parent’s Lap?
Author: damefriday
Score: 7
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18sig6k/eli5_why_can_children_under_2_fly_on_a_parents_lap/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by sassynapoleon: Unrestrained lap children are the least safe occupants in a plane crash by a significant margin. However, plane crashes are so rare that forcing parents to purchase extra seats for infants would cause more deaths due to parents that decide to drive rather than fly.
  Comment by Couldnotbehelpd: Plane crashes aren’t car crashes. They’re not sudden OR immediate. You have time to prepare and there are positions that would keep the baby as safe as possible. A small child would be obliterated by a belt anyway, which is why children have car seats. 

Also, plane crashes are _incredibly_ rare, so it’s not something people really need to be concerned with.
  Comment by Captain-Griffen: They'd need a child seat and air travel is very, very safe. The odds they'll be killed in a plane crash on a lap is vastly less than the odds they would die in a car crash if their parents drove instead. The policy saves lives, statistically speaking, by encouraging air travel over car travel.

I believe a seat is actually safer for them, but it's incredibly unlikely that a) you'll be in a potentially fatal plane crash and b) that the seat will help. Potentially fatal plane crashes are very rare but when they happen often very fatal.
  Comment by thesploo: One thing that always bothered me is that you're not allowed to put your baby in a baby sling or front facing carrier while on a plane. You have to literally hold them the whole time. It's pretty hard to do that without cramping up on a cross country flight.
  Comment by JustSomeUsername99: If a child were seat belted under the same seat belt as the parent, the adult's body flying forward would crush the child and kill them.

Having the parent hold the child is safer. If the crash is violent enough to rip the child from the parents arms, they are all likely going to die anyway.

FYI, as others have said. Flying is the safest way to travel by far.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: If a body of water freezes: does it freeze with the waves in place or rather straight?
Author: Little_Transition_24
Score: 8
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18shl08/eli5_if_a_body_of_water_freezes_does_it_freeze/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by NaNaNaPandaMan: Water, or anything really, freezing is when the molecules stop moving. As waves are caused by movement, you couldn't freeze them in place. 

Caveat. If you could somehow make something that instantaneously stops molecules from moving, then yes waves would stick in place.
  Comment by 8004MikeJones: Moving water is more resistant to freezing but seemingly can freeze as is if it happens fast enough.  Water-to-ice is a liquid to solid phase change. The phase change happens because the  kinetic energy and heat dictates what structures can be formed and how fast. Water has no structure and is formless when liquid, but once things get cold enough crystalline structures form and begin to hold molecules in place. If things aren't that cold, the rate of structural change happens slowly and quite evenly. If things are extremely cold the change is more chaotic and more "instant".
  Comment by adastramuerte: Doesn’t it still freeze with some slight ripples? Like it isn’t perfectly flat
  Comment by LurkerOrHydralisk: Now I wonder what kind of conditions would be necessary for something like 4 foot waves to freeze in place.

The ocean has a little bit of thermal mass, and water distributes heat well. I imagine it would have to be insanely cold all at once.

Would it even be possibly with the thermal capacity and heat conductivity of air? Could it just be insanely windy with very cold air coming in to suck all the heat out of waves while still making waves?
  Comment by graison: Like a Day after Tomorrow-type scenario?

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Can equilibrium be reached?
Author: Intelligent-Bus-6392
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18sgs81/eli5_can_equilibrium_be_reached/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by leinadwen: Reaching equilibrium would assume that no additional heat is being put into the system, or that the system is at steady state, which isn’t the case. Additional heat is being put in via the sun, so there will always be one place with more energy than another. 

On a larger scale, there’s the concept of the heat death of the universe, where every energy system has reached a level state and there is no differential between energy states to allow any reaction to happen ever again. But that’s slightly bigger than just the earth.
  Comment by bernpfenn: on a smaller scale, earth's CO2 will cause rising temperatures for the next 1500 years and then level out at +10C into thermal equilibrium. 

I don't think there will be anyone observing.
  Comment by Intelligent-Bus-6392: Okay so it is possible, but everything in the universe would die out and there would be no trace of anything. Good enough of an answer for me!
  Comment by dirschau: That's assuming earth will survive the Sun's Red Giant phase. It could go either way, we don't currently know.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: why are entognatha classed organism no longer considered insects
Author: draugyr
Score: 5
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18sepxa/eli5_why_are_entognatha_classed_organism_no/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by oldmansalvatore: Entognatha literally translates to internal mouth parts. All insects on the other hand are supposed to have external mouth parts. That's the most prominent ELI5 differentiation, but there are significant other differences as well.

The real reason though is that these are arthropods (creatures with exoskeleton and joined legs) which evolved six-leggedness (hexapod) independently from insects. This is determined from genetic comparison. Hexapod leg arrangement is the defining characteristic of insects. Modern classification is moving away from classification based on physical characteristics, to classification based on genetic similarity. 

Side note: entognatha also evolved their six legged walking independently from each other, so the classification might soon change as well. 

It's explained well in a lot more detail in the wiki https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Entognatha

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: What exactly happens when a bird flies into the engine of a plane?
Author: CrookshanksandCoffee
Score: 36
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18semsi/eli5_what_exactly_happens_when_a_bird_flies_into/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by DeHackEd: First of all, planes are designed to fly on a single engine. Take-off and climb will require more, especially for the really big planes which have 4 engines, but they can fly just fine with half their engines gone. Jet engines are very reliable, but there's so many of them that a few will die every day just from mechanical problems, sure. Jet pilots can fly their plane with 1 engine just fine, and even the autopilot can usually cope. What happened to US Airways 1549 was unique because the birds were geese - large birds - which went into both engines and the plane hadn't even been in the air for 2 minutes yet. Hardly enough time to climb to a safe altitude, so they only had a few minutes before they'd hit the ground again...

As for what happens.. the front fan blade is spinning very fast and sucking in air very rapidly, so the bird goes into that and get diced up. If it's a small bird, hopefully the fan blades survive. A lot of modern engines are large bypass - the air goes through the fan blades right out the back - so hopefully most of the bird goes that way. Damage should be minimal and mainly to the fan blades themselves, likely causing an imbalance in the engine even if nothing breaks. The engine might need to be run at slower or idle power, spinning slowly and not really helping the plane to fly, but still generating electricity and stuff.

If the bird does go into the main engine, there are even more fan blades inside to be damaged within the compressor area. These will almost certainly force the engine to run at idle or be shut down. Depending on how far it goes into the engine, bird bits might reach the combustion area and be set on fire. This might lead to an engine fire, but at this point the engine would need to be shut down anyway.

Even if somehow nothing was physically damaged, bits of unwanted bird inside the engine would cause the flow of air through the engine to be disrupted. Jet engines need a pretty smooth flow of air through them and this could cause things like the combustion process to not occur properly, flames shooting out the back of the engine, or maybe making their way towards to the front where it definitely doesn't belong. This would be the "clogged up" scenario.

Simply put, engines aren't meant to take in anything but air and water. To pass certification, they do have to prove they can withstand taking something like a bird, but the pass condition is simply "Does not explode into bits, raining metal down on the ground". Blowing up internally and shutting down safely is a pass.
  Comment by None: [deleted]
  Comment by Belnak: Funny story… the US Army has an engine testing facility in Tennessee, and they shoot chickens and turkeys into jet engines to test the engine’s survivability. Some engineers from Eastern Europe were visiting and decided to adopt the test at home. After a few tests, they called the US, because testing was destroying all of their engines. Turns out, they were using frozen chickens.
  Comment by cellardweller1234: The bird turns into paste very quickly. Jet engines don't like to aspire paste so they don't function at peak performance. I'm not an aeronautical engineer but I'm going to go ahead and posit that jet engines can handle a bit of "paste" but would rather not have to deal with a lot of it.
  Comment by SoulWager: The blades of the fan are moving hundreds of miles per hour, are built to be as light as possible, and "bird" can mean a 10~15 pound goose. That kind of impact can shatter the fan blades it hits, the bearings get destroyed by the weight imbalance, and the compressor and turbine behind the fan get to chew on both bird AND the metal from the broken fan blades.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5:Why is cancer so wide spread since it was almost unknown up till 19 century?
Author: OkMessage9499
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18secks/eli5why_is_cancer_so_wide_spread_since_it_was/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Red_AtNight: Cancer has been known about since antiquity. The reason why we call it cancer is because Ancient Greek doctors thought that there were some similarities between tumour skin and crab skin, hence naming it after crabs. Hippocrates described several different types of cancers and he lived over 2000 years ago.

Anyways, we’ve certainly gotten better at diagnosing cancer, and part of the problem our ancestors had was that they didn’t have microscopes. That’s why it took until the 1800s to determine that cancer spread via the lymph node.
  Comment by oblivious_fireball: It was always there, we've just gotten better at identifying it. Before you would often be just given some sort of vague "fell ill" diagnosis as you withered and died.
  Comment by RickKassidy: People die of cancer mostly in their 70s and 80s. So you have to live long enough to get cancer. People didn’t used to live that long.

Also, diagnosis is better. You get colon cancer now, you know you die of colon cancer. Back in the 1800s, you get colon cancer, you died of a general malaise and withering that wasn’t understood and no one knew it was stage 4 adenocarcinoma.
  Comment by sirbearus: Your question starts off badly. Cancer has been known for thousands of years. 

In the past. People died from all causes earlier. The fact that we live longer means YOU are aware of it because we live long enough for more people to get it due to longer lives. 

We are also able to treat some kinds pretty successfully. Many others are still very lethal.
  Comment by gingerwerewolf: Well, Cancer has been around for as long as multi cellular life has. We just discovered it recently.

Also, Cancer is a catch-all name for 100s if not thousands of conditions.

Cancer is not a disease you can "Catch" in the same way as other illnesses. It's more of a condition where the bodies cells start multiplying in an unwanted or bad way. This leads to parts of your body breaking or not doing the right thing. 

Things can cause cancer though. Diet, smoking, alcohol are very common things that can cause cancer

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: what are the effects of Snow Farming on water conservation efforts? I have read that Snow Farming is becoming more popular in ski resorts to try and lengthen their seasons. Isn't it just putting water we have already collected back into the environment and therefore wasting water and energy?
Author: bombofham
Score: 7
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18se2vl/eli5_what_are_the_effects_of_snow_farming_on/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by PrincetonToss: The whole point of snow farming is that the water isn't go back into the environment!

Snow farming is an incredibly bizarre term meaning, basically, "store snow under tarps so it doesn't melt during the summer". In a lot of ski spots, it never gets much above freezing even in the summer, so if you can just protect the snow from the sun, you can preserve a lot of it.

Why is this a problem? A lot of the biggest and most important rivers in the world are fed primarily by snowmelt, not rain. These are often especially important for providing water during summer months which are often not as rainy. For example, the Po in northern Italy is fed largely by snow melting in the Alps, and water from it is used to irrigate the Po Valley, one of Europe's breadbaskets. An even better example are the great rivers of India - the Ganges, the Indus, and the Brahmaputra - but they aren't going to be experiencing much snow farming any time soon.

So, snow farming is sort of "storing" water that should otherwise be melting slowly over the course of the summer and fall and returning to the water table that way. Thus, the practice is reducing the amount of water that would otherwise be joining the Rhone or whatever.

I think that, objectively, snow farming is pretty clearly bad. Maybe not very bad, but obviously bad.

But the question isn't how good or bad snow farming is; the question is, is it better than the alternatives?

Right now, ski resorts across the world "make" snow, running big pipelines of whatever up the mountainside and then spraying cold water into the air where it will quickly freeze into something approximating snow before falling down. All things being equal, this will remove as much water from the local environment as snow farming would prevent from being added. But snow making also consumes a lot of energy, often from diesel engines right there on the mountain, which are going to be creating a lot of pollution. Plus potential damage from dragging the pipelines up, the energy needed to run the trucks or snowcats to move stuff, the carbon cost of manufacturing the snow-making machinery, etc.

The upside is that the water might be sourced from somewhere else, where water is more plentiful - though probably not, since water resources tend to be fairly local in source at the end of the day, and being in the mountains means being at the top of the ladder, where it's hard to take from other catchment basins. Still, you won't be interfering with the water distribution on that particular set of mountainsides.

So compared to making snow, snow farming is probably pretty good (though it's not 100% clear).

(Not directly related to water, but snow farming will also kill the biota beneath the stores; a lot of alpine plants and animals are used to be covered with snow for 4-8 months a year, but longer or even continuous coverage could kill them.)
  Comment by weeddealerrenamon: Well, it's definitely *using* energy, whether that's *wasted* or not depends on how much you value having snow on ski slopes.

Ideally, it involves taking water from places where it's plentiful, or collecting it *when* it's plentiful, and moving it to where/when it's needed more. In practice, it might be profitable for a ski resort to buy/use water that would be better put to use elsewhere. No blanket answer I think
  Comment by c0y0t3_sly: This is....partly right. Maybe largely right, aside.feom the "therefore it's bad!" conclusion. In basins where snow melt is the main source water rights tends to be pretty tightly controlled. If the ski area ends up with the rights to the water they're storing it probably means that the net impact on the local economy is higher than using it downstream for agriculture *or* that there's enough in the system to satisfy both their rights and the (almost certainly more senior) ag and fish/wildlife shares anyway.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: How do we/animals die of old age?
Author: ScoutyBeagle
Score: 7
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18sdxyb/eli5_how_do_weanimals_die_of_old_age/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by HaleyReddits: So each time your cells replicate, their telomeres become shorter and shorter. These are the little nucleotide “caps” at the ends of your chromosomes. As they shorten, the cell has higher chances of flawed division, resulting in aging or cell death.

What this means in the big picture is your body simply can’t make enough good cells to replace the ones dying in your vital organs, and so their function slows down and eventually stops, leading to death.
  Comment by ScoutyBeagle: Thank you! That makes sense!
  Comment by CharsOwnRX-78-2: To add, we don’t *actually* die of “old age”, we die of organ failure or cancer or some other disease that preys upon our weakened body
  Comment by ScoutyBeagle: Ah right thanks! That’s what was confusing me.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: why do humans get menstrual cycles but other animals don’t?
Author: s0larium_live
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18sdxgi/eli5_why_do_humans_get_menstrual_cycles_but_other/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by RoyalWuff: We're not the only species that menstruates.

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6541669/#:~:text=In%20fact%2C%20approximately%2098%25%20of,the%20elephant%20shrew%20%5B6%5D.

Humans menstruate because we don't have a "mating season" so our body is primed for reproduction year-round. This means cyclically preparing to, and dealing with the consequences of failing to, reproduce.
  Comment by sebeed: What most mammals experience is called an oestrus cycle. where ovulation is not triggered by cyclical hormones, but instead by things like seasonal changes in temperature, rainfall, male pheromones or stimulation during intercourse.

Approximately 98% of all mammalian species do not menstruate. The menstral cycle is almost exclusively restricted to ["higher order" primates, which include humans, rhesus macaques and baboons, with the only exceptions (until very recently) being a minority of bats and the elephant shrew](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6541669/)

idk what causes a mammal to have a period though. dogs have oestrus cycles and are known to bleed. I assume it has to do with if the mammal sheds the egg or not? for example, cats reabsorb the egg instead of shedding it and they aren't known to bleed. mind you this paragraph is speculation. take it with a grain of salt, I studied vet tech but that was nearly 15 years ago.
  Comment by PrincetonToss: Great question!

tl;dr we don't know.

First, as the other comment notes, we're not the only animals that menstruate! Many other primates, bats, elephant shrews, and several rodents do too!

That said, we definitely menstruate the hardest. Very few of those animals have visible bleeding from the vagina, for example. Humans also have the most uterine-wall-thickening, relatively speaking.

So, why do these animals menstruate, but the vast majority of mammals don't? And why do humans do it so strongly? Good questions! The first thing to note is that the fact that menstruation is found in very distantly related animals suggests that it either arose independently several times, or was lost in almost all mammals somewhat recently - the only way that the collection of menstruating mammals could be even more distantly related is basically if there were some marsupials in there.

That suggests that menstruation is actually pretty handy for *something*, and possibly more than one something (it's a common fallacy to assume that similar traits in organisms must have similar reasons, and it's often the case, but it's not *prima facie* true).

So we've established that menstruation is almost certainly good for **something**. But what?

One thing is that it increases the chances that a fertilized egg will successfully implant on the uterine wall. Funnily enough, it also makes it easier for a uterus to abort a very early pregnancy, should the mother's body decide for some reason that it doesn't like the blastocyst (what we call a potential future animal when it's more than one cell, but still at the point where you can meaningfully count individual cells). So menstruation both increases the chance of a pregnancy successfully starting, and of a pregnancy ending quickly if needed, instead of consuming the mother's resources and maybe risking her life - remember, birth in humans is very dangerous, and even a miscarriage can kill a mother distressing often without modern medicine. Presumably pregnancy and miscarriage is expensive for the other animals on the list, too. Intuitively, it makes a lot of sense for bats, at least, since a pregnant bat is hauling a lot of extra cargo when she flies.

This isn't the only theory, but as far as I know it's the most common one. Other theories include the idea that the uterine lining might help protect the uterus from potential semen-borne diseases, or that the thickened uterine lining might help protect the mother from a very invasive placenta generated by the fetus - some evolutionary biologists hold that pregnancy is a constant conflict between fetus and mother, the fetus trying to consume more and more resources and maybe even influence the mother's behavior and physiology, while the mother's body in turn tries to fend that shit off. But that's a whole 'nother **thing**.

Fun next question: why are there only a handful of species that undergo menopause? It's humans and a couple big toothed whales (orcas, narwhals, belugas, and short-finned pilot whales that we know of).
  Comment by themajorfall: It was part of an evolutionary arms race between the desires of the male genetics, the female body, and the fetus.  Since a male may only have one opportunity to breed with a female, his genes want to preserve that pregnancy and potential baby at any cost.  So for him, any genes that selected for a more aggressive fetus that takes more resources from the mother is ideal.  Meanwhile, the female has to take a more balanced approach.  Since each child is a huge investment in time and energy, she has to consider not only this pregnancy, but future pregnancies and current children.  So to her, any fetus that isn't perfect should be discarded.  So through evolution, fetuses got more aggressive (attaching immediately, burrowing into the blood supply, releasing chemicals to hijack greater blood supply), while women's bodies got more clever (giving the fetus a placenta to attach to, releasing counter chemicals, and menstruation).  As part of this, the uterus can't precisely kill an inferior fetus, but it can have the ability to detach the uterine lining and flush everything.  But as a side effect of having this ability, the uterus has to be prepared to detach the lining each month whether it needs to or not.
  Comment by therealdilbert: > only a handful of species that undergo menopause

how many species live a quiet enough life to live long enough?

--------------------------------------------------

Title: eli5: Why do kids need to care of their baby teeth if they're going to eventually fall out and regrow?
Author: big_dumpling
Score: 143
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18sdfvp/eli5_why_do_kids_need_to_care_of_their_baby_teeth/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by MathematicianBulky40: Good dental health is generally linked to good overall health. It's a good habit to get in to for when they're older. They aren't going to make many friends with manky breath. The teeth will be in their mouths for 5-10 years so maybe it would be nice to keep them in good condition.
  Comment by hdatontodo: Infection can spread to the permanent teeth and into the bloodstream and brain.

It can cause pain and difficulty eating.

It is rare but children have died due to dental decay.
  Comment by medic7051: A few reasons I would think. First, to establish good habits the child will use later in life. Second, getting an infection due to bad oral hygiene can be really bad. The types of bacteria that linger in your mouth can become fatal if they get into your bloodstream. Also, I'm sure most parents don't want their kids stinky breath right in their face all the time. I'm sure we all can accept that kids don't exactly understand personal space with their parents at a young age. That's just what comes to my mind immediately, I'm sure there are plenty of other reasons as well.
  Comment by EvenSpoonier: Partly it's a matter of setting up good habits for when the permanent teeth grow in. But baby teeth also help to hold the jaw in the right place with the right open spots for permanent teeth to grow in. It would be a problem to lose them early, or to lose a lot of them, because rhat would cause problems later on.

Fun fact: even babies already have their permanent teeth already present. They're just behind the baby teeth, waiting for the right time to erupt. If you don't believe me, GIS for baby skulls. And then for a good therapist, because you will probably need one.
  Comment by OriginalLetrow: Ever heard of gum disease?

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Sleepwalking - How is it possible that the body can move and function without the mind knowing about it?
Author: confused_bekar
Score: 1
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18scr3e/eli5_sleepwalking_how_is_it_possible_that_the/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Anonyff: The mind does know about it in the moment, it's just not storing long term memories. The brain is still functioning, making decisions, controlling the body, you just don't remember it.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Where do people who work in middle-of-nowhere gas stations and establishments live?
Author: Shimpcrackers
Score: 62
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18sc02e/eli5_where_do_people_who_work_in_middleofnowhere/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Various_Succotash_79: Anywhere. 

I know someone who works at a gas station like that. She lives about 10 miles away on a farm. She drives to work like most people do.
  Comment by Patient_Item3507: It feels middle of nowhere to you, but if you zoom out on the map a little, you'll realize there's at least one small town nearby.
  Comment by s0rce: In my limited experience of talking to the people they live somewhere nearby. There are usually towns or some housing.
  Comment by presnwa: Many of these middle of nowhere establishments have attached living quarters. Other than that, as someone else has mentioned, there may be small roads, or dirt roads to housing that you may not see due to not being from the area.
  Comment by Offgridiot: You seem to be unaware of how many people live in a rural setting. There are lots and lots. They (we) choose to live away from crowded population situations (cities). If you’re driving along a highway, and see a business “in the middle of nowhere”, there is likely a small side (gravel?) road not too far away that leads to many, spread-out, larger properties with houses. I live on 53 acres. My closest neighbour is about a Km away. The closest business (general store) is about 10 Km away, and the closest gas station is about 20 Km away. Closest Walmart is about 1 1/2 hours away. Aaaaahhhhh! This is the life!

--------------------------------------------------

Title: eli5: Why is 20° water so cold compared to 20° outside?
Author: TheCoolTreeGuy
Score: 5
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18sbnyb/eli5_why_is_20_water_so_cold_compared_to_20/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by tdscanuck: Your body can't actually sense temperature, it senses how fast it's gaining or losing heat. Anything that causes you to lose heat quickly feels cold. 

Water is a \*far\* better conductor of heat than air. 20C water carries heat away from you quickly and it feels cold. 20C air doesn't remove heat nearly as fast. 

On the flip side, you can hold things that are \*really\* hot (hundreds or thousands of degrees) bare handed if they're really bad at conducting heat, because if they can't transfer heat to you you don't feel hot.
  Comment by MadFalcon101: Water is a much better heat conductor than air, so it can immediately absorb your body’s heat and make you cold while air kind of just keeps your body heat around you
  Comment by DeHackEd: Your body doesn't experience "cold" directly. You experience your body heat being pulled out from you. The faster it can do that, the colder is *feels*.

Water is a liquid, and as such is very dense compared to air. It can really press into your skin, cover every tiny spot on it, and try to pull out that heat. With a core temperature of about 37 degrees and the water at 20, it aims to balance out that temperature. With such a huge difference, plus the size of the pool itself... oh yeah, it has an easy time pulling out all that heat and you feel cold.

Air... doesn't have that. It doesn't have the sheer pressure covering your body. So the rate you lose heat is actually very slow, and your body is fine with that. Wind changes things, applying more contact pressure and moving heat faster, hence the existence  of a "wind-chill factor".

As a variation, go lay down on a concrete floor without much clothes on. Like water, solid concrete is dense and even if it's at room temperature it'll siphon off your body heat quickly. Even in summer you could shiver.
  Comment by None: [deleted]
  Comment by RindFisch: That's also the reason why, if you touch a metal pole on a cold day, it feels *much* colder than a wooden one. If both poles are standing in the open, they're actually the same temperature (namely that of the environment). But that's not what you're feeling. You only feel that metal is a much better heat conductor and thus drains heat out of your hand quicker.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Why are we not able to "see" the empty space that makes up most of matter?
Author: MississippiJoel
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18sbgvl/eli5_why_are_we_not_able_to_see_the_empty_space/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by tdscanuck: Electrons aren't little balls whizzing around like the old "planetary" model you might have seen in high school chemistry...they're basically clouds. They're smeared out in space. 

However, that's a different issue than why we can't see the empty space in matter...it's way (way way way way) too small for us to see directly. 

In general, you can't see anything smaller than the wavelength of the light (or equivalent) thing you're looking at it with. To see features smaller than atoms you need wavelengths that are that small. Atoms are sub-1 nanometer (a billionth of a meter) so to "see" features that small you need light with a wavelength about that small, which pushes you up into X-ray/gamma ray territory. And those particles are so energetic they tend to screw up the atoms they run into, including knocking the electrons off.
  Comment by RhynoD: You kind of can. That's what photons are reflecting off of and coming from, is that electron cloud.

Note about the electrons, they aren't really going so fast that they act like they're all over the place, they just kind of *are* all over the place. Location and momentum at the quantum level aren't normally clearly defined, it depends on probability. An electron can be here, or it can be there. Until you do something that requires it to be here or there, it's here *and* there at the same time. When you do something to it, forcing it to pick a spot, where it ends up depends on how likely it is to be here or there. 

This way, atomic nuclei are surrounded by a sort of cloud of electron "thereness" where the "thicker" the cloud is, the more likely an electron is to be there when you do something to it. While the electron is still acting like a "cloud", the whole volume that it occupies behaves like there's an electron in it. If you try to push two atoms close together, their electron clouds are both negatively charged, and electrons can't occupy the same space anyway. So the clouds repel each other and prevent the atoms from getting closer. 

And when you try to shoot a photon through that "empty" space, it will find the electron and get absorbed or reflected. When you "see" an atom, that's what you're seeing - the photon reflecting off of or being emitted by the electron cloud.

Transparency comes from how electrons interact with photons. Photons are packets of energy that energize electrons into higher energy states. The analogy is that they go into a higher "orbit" but remember that's just a loose analogy because electrons aren't really in orbit, right? They're in those clouds of probability. Regardless, the cloud gets a little farther from the nucleus. But these energy levels or "orbits" can only be at specific levels, like taking an elevator between floors in a building. The elevator can't stop in between floors, it must go all the way. 

If that energy level or "floor" is full, electrons can't "get on the elevator" at all, and can't absorb the photon. The photon just passes right through that electron cloud. Water (and glass, and air) have electrons arranged in their molecules such that all the "floors" that correspond with the energy levels that our eyes can see are full. That means those photons aren't absorbed and the substance is transparent.
  Comment by Papancasudani: “According to our best laws of physics, the fundamental building blocks of Nature are not discrete particles at all. Instead, they are continuous fluid-like substances, spread throughout all of space. We call these objects fields... Every particle your body–indeed, every particle in the Universe–is a tiny ripple of the underlying field”

—David Tong

--------------------------------------------------

Title: eli5: Could you theoretically forge metal into slag?
Author: EasySort
Score: 99
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18sbgfh/eli5_could_you_theoretically_forge_metal_into_slag/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by tmahfan117: Yes, you can, it would take quite a while but if you just keep continuously heating and damaging metal it will keep oxidizing and breaking down. Yea.
  Comment by Visual_Fly_9638: Yes. When I was learning blacksmithing I ruined steel before by heating it too many times and beating it down into flakes. If you're heating it particularly hot you can cook the carbon out of the steel and change the nature of the metal too.
  Comment by LordOverThis: Hey, a topic I'm qualified to answer on!

Hokay, so, "slag" in the steel mill and in the forge have slightly different (albeit related) meanings.  Slag in the steel mill is an impurity in the melt that you're *trying* to remove because it would diminish the quality of the pour; slag in the forge is the iron-rich oxide layer that forms on the hot surface of the workpiece and is literally your stock burning away in an unwanted way, because it isn't actually an impurity.  More accurately (f*** you, Forged in Fire...) it should be called "scale" or "firescale" to keep the two terms separate, and you want to limit it as much as possible because it's your stock disintegrating before you.  The ability to minimize scale is one of the hallmarks of a skilled smith vs a beginner -- skilled smiths are more efficient at moving metal properly, and can work a piece to shape in fewer heats, which greatly reduces scale formation.

To answer the original question without belaboring the point then, yes, it is entirely possible to reduce a billet to scale.  Not because you're pulling impurities out, though (the mill already did that if you're working graded steel), but because you're literally burning up your steel and tossing money away.
  Comment by BikingEngineer: In the steel industry, this is basically how you remove the leftover molten steel when drying out the furnace. One guy is manipulating an oxygen pipe, and everyone else throws shovels of lime at the pools of molten metal where oxygen is being blown. This converts the remaining steel into slag, which is then easily removed with a jackhammer, and the lining can then be refreshed.
  Comment by tdscanuck: Adding on for OP, anything that isn't the base alloy is technically an impurity, so you don't want slag \*in\* your object. When you initially start out from your lump of whatever base material you're forging you may have a lot of other crap in there besides the alloy. Initial forging helps consolidate the alloy and force out the other junk. Once you've driven that out \*and\* you're at the net shape you want, you're "done". After that, like /u/tmahfan117 said, you're just oxidizing the outer layer and knocking it off.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Please explain what it means in the NFL to DEFER on a kickoff
Author: ejaej
Score: 26
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18saxim/eli5_please_explain_what_it_means_in_the_nfl_to/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by SlumdogSkillionaire: If you win the coin toss, you get to pick from the following options:

- choose whether to receive or kick
- choose which end of the field you want to start on
- defer your choice until the second half, letting your opponent choose from the first two options for the first half

If you choose one of the first two options, your opponent gets the other; so if I win the toss and choose to receive the ball, my opponent gets to pick which end of the field to start on (can be advantageous outdoors).
  Comment by pistachiogrande: Teams generally want to receive the ball to start the second half.  This can be accomplished by choosing to kick off in the first half or deferring until the second half.  If you win the toss and choose to kickoff, the opponent then chooses which end of the field to defend, which may matter at the end of the game.  If you win the toss and defer, the opponent must choose between kicking or receiving the opening kickoff.  Since they know you’ll receive in the second half, they should choose to receive in the first half.    

Here’s the key: by deferring you forced the opponent to make the first choice between kick or receive.  You now get to make the second choice of field direction.

TL;DR Deferring allows you to choose to receive the second half kickoff AND the most favorable field direction.
  Comment by Red_AtNight: The team who wins the toss gets to choose if they’re kicking or receiving to start the game.

The team who lost the toss gets to choose if they’re kicking or receiving to start the second half.

If you choose to defer, then your team gets to choose at the second half, and your opponents gets to choose at the start of the game.

Say you win the toss and choose to receive - you start the game with the ball. Your opponent gets to choose at the start of the second half, naturally they also choose to receive. But what if you want the first possession of the second half? If you win the toss and choose to kick, your opponent gets to choose at the half and could just make you kick again. Whoops.

But if you win the toss and defer, then yeah, your opponent probably chooses to receive to start the game, but you get to choose to receive at the start of the second half.
  Comment by Chimney-Imp: If I defer then it means I want my team to control the ball at the start of the second half
  Comment by blakeh95: There are 4 choices that a team can make at the start of a half.

1. I want to KICK the ball first.
2. I want to RECEIVE the ball first.
3. I want to play going this direction: >
4. I want to play going this direction: <

If you win the toss and use your first half choice to pick #1 and kick, then your opponent gets the first choice in the second half.  Unless they are feeling very sorry for you, it's unlikely that they will choose KICK when they could choose RECEIVE instead.

Deferring your first choice to the second half means that you want your opponent to make their choice first in the first half (even though you won the toss) and you will make the first choice in the second half (which, if you didn't defer, your opponent would go first).

Long story short: if you use your choice to pick KICK (giving your opponent the ball), then your opponent can then use their choice in the second half to pick RECEIVE (also giving them the ball).

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Why home Internet is with unlimited data plan but mobile is limited?
Author: tomerFire
Score: 13
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18saqnq/eli5_why_home_internet_is_with_unlimited_data/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by xnickg77: Not all home internet is unlimited. I managed to hit a cap of 1.5tb one month when I downloaded tons of games after getting Xbox gamepass for the first time.
  Comment by tdscanuck: Different technologies. Home internet is through hard wires (except for the very last link over WiFi, but that part is local to your house)...coax for older installations, fiber optic for newer ones. The bandwidth of the wires themselves is \*extremely\* high, far higher than any single home can use, so the amount of data you transmit really isn't an issue. Most of the expense is in running the wires in the first place, which is mostly done. 

Mobile is via radio waves in air...there's inherently much less bandwidth for current technologies, it takes a lot more and more expensive hardware to run the network, and it constantly needs upgrading to keep up with faster phones and more phones (and more phones in a small area). 

In either case, the ISP centers are 1) usually not the limiting factor on bandwidth and 2) not the people you're paying for the data plan. They're not the issue. It's whoever is providing the connection between you and the data centers that you're paying and that controls the infrastructure that's providing the bandwidth.

The next generation of mobile is the first one where the bandwidth is high enough that it's basically comparable to home WiFi and might see convergence of the billing plans.
  Comment by TehWildMan_: Network capacity is a far larger issue with mobile networks, so cellular carriers charge based on how much of a burden on their networks you can be
  Comment by clonicle: Technology aside... Because mobile carriers know people will pay for it, so they keep doing it.

Yes, yes... capacity and bandwidth limitations are there, but if there's a way of doing the same thing while making more money, a company will 100% do that.
  Comment by GNUr000t: There's a couple of reasons, and it all comes down to capacity.

Mobile Internet happens over licensed radio bands, and mobile carriers pay a lot of money for licenses to use those bands. And there's only so much traffic that can be sent over them in a given second, in a given area (you can reuse the channels as long as each base station is far enough away from a base station using the same channel). Obviously, this means there's going to be much more contention in heavily populated areas, especially during commute times.

Almost every mobile carrier has moved to an unlimited-with-high-speed-bucket model. Meaning, you can use all the data you want, but you're considered low priority after you use XGB. Sometimes this means that you'll instantly be capped at a lower speed until the next billing cycle, and sometimes this means that you're only going to be slowed down if there's lots of people using the network where you're currently at.

Home Internet, even fixed wireless, doesn't really have this issue, because customers don't "move around", the service is bound to an address. This makes planning out and expanding capacity much easier, even if it's wireless service. For wired service, you can control how many houses are sharing a medium, be it passive fiber or coaxial cable. Because it's easier to plan out capacity, you don't really have a situation where people are contending with each other for time on the shared medium. And if you do, you can just... add another. Wireless channels can only be "reused" when users are far away and won't be able to hear each other. Two (or 5, or 10) fiber or coax cables that are bunched right next to each other are all completely separate and isolated.

This is an even larger issue for unlicensed bands, such as 2.4ghz and 5ghz used for wi-fi. The single best thing you can do to improve your wi-fi experience (and your neighbors' wi-fi experience) is to move as many things as possible \*off\* of wi-fi and onto a wire, which as we just explored, is its own separate collision domain. Every microsecond you're not sending traffic over wi-fi is a microsecond that something \*else\* can talk.  


One last thing about fixed (cellular) wireless is that, in population-dense areas, it usually happens over mmWave 5G. This is meaningful because not only does it have insane capacity, but it doesn't go as far. This means you can reuse the channels more often in the same city, and each base station covers less houses.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Double empathy problem
Author: calm2170
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18sa2xy/eli5_double_empathy_problem/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by tmahfan117: It’s really pretty simple, it’s just that two individuals with very different world/life experiences will struggle to emphasize with one another. The “double” just comes from both people.
  Comment by calm2170: Thanks for replying, any idea how this applies to ASD?
  Comment by Jayn_Newell: Autism Spectrum Disorder is characterized in large part by an inability to understand other people (the “theory of mind” argument comes from this trait), but what often gets missed (because we’re so often struggling to understand NTs) is that we get misunderstood just as often as we misunderstand others. It’s a less visible issue than “oh this person is weird”, but one that autistics experience *constantly*.
  Comment by calm2170: Thanks for replying. I constantly find that people don’t understand where my comments, remarks etc. are coming from or what my intentions are and usually jump to the worst conclusion. I strongly suspect that I’m somewhere on the spectrum and this is causing a problem with communication at work.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: why do flies in colder places move more slowly and in warmer/tropical places move faster?
Author: SheenaAquaticBird
Score: 1
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18s9tlx/eli5_why_do_flies_in_colder_places_move_more/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Lithuim: Insects are cold blooded, so the speed of their internal body chemistry is dictated by the temperature outside.

On hot days they’re very active.  On cold days they’re sluggish.  If it gets too cold they’re unable to fly at all.

Insects that live in places with serious winters have some physical and behavioral adaptations to avoid freezing to death on the first cold fall night, but you won’t find them flying around either.

Insects are mostly seasonal at the higher latitudes and are only active during warmer months.  If you see a fly in Minneapolis in January, it probably hatched indoors by mistake.
  Comment by alexcorsogr: Flies, like many cold-blooded creatures, are affected by temperature. In colder environments, their metabolism slows down due to the decrease in temperature, leading to reduced muscle activity and slower movements. This is because chemical reactions in their bodies, which regulate muscle function and overall movement, occur at a slower pace in colder temperatures.  
Conversely, in warmer or tropical environments, flies experience an increase in their metabolism. The higher temperature speeds up their metabolic processes, leading to increased muscle activity and faster movements. This is why you might observe flies buzzing around more energetically in warmer climates.  
Temperature influences the rate of biochemical reactions within an organism's body. For insects like flies, this directly impacts their ability to move and function, causing variations in their speed and activity levels in different temperature conditions.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: How do we know carbon dating has been the same over the last billion or so years?
Author: starforce1616
Score: 3
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18s9hqg/eli5_how_do_we_know_carbon_dating_has_been_the/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Kaitlyn_The_Magnif: The half-life of a radioactive isotope is considered a physical constant. It's based on the fundamental properties of the atomic nucleus and isn't affected by external factors like temperature, pressure, or chemical state. This stability over time and across conditions is a core principle in physics.

Scientists cross-check radiometric dating results with other dating methods, such as dendrochronology (tree rings), ice cores, or varves (layers in sedimentary rock). These methods are independent of radioactive decay and can validate the age obtained by radiometric dating.

The decay rates of isotopes have been observed and measured with extreme precision over the last century, and no changes have been detected. If the decay rate had changed significantly over geological time, it would be detectable in these measurements.

While the environment in which an object is found can affect the contamination of the sample (for example, carbon from nearby sources), it doesn't affect the decay rate of the carbon-14 it contains. The half-life remains constant, whether the sample is at the bottom of the ocean or in a dry desert.
  Comment by Ridley_Himself: We've put radioactive materials through all sorts of conditions and, for the most part, it doesn't affect the half-life. The one exception is that electron density around a nucleus can affect isotopes that decay by electron capture. Other than that, decay appears to depend on fundamental physical constants. For isotopes that undergo alpha decay, there is a relationship between half-life and the amount of energy released when the atom decays.

One note, though, is the carbon dating is just one of several commonly used methods of radiometric dating. Carbon-14 is only used on organic samples younger than about 50,000 years.
  Comment by dvali: Carbon dating isn't used over billion year timescales. We use different methods for that.

Over the timescales that carbon dating is used, we have independent methods to verify its effectiveness. If you already know that something is 1500 years old, and the carbon dating agrees, then you can trust the carbon dating when it says other things are 1500 years old.
  Comment by starforce1616: That is a great answer thank you very much for you explanation.
  Comment by Visual_Fly_9638: This is a cool subject. It turns out that we've had, about 1.7 billion years ago, natural, stable fission reactions on our planet:  
[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural\_nuclear\_fission\_reactor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_nuclear_fission_reactor)

And that the end results of that fission reaction match our mathematical calculations and current observations of isotope decay.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Why aren’t our bodies adapting to our more sedentary lifestyles by reducing appetites?
Author: ishooz
Score: 1861
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18s8fx0/eli5_why_arent_our_bodies_adapting_to_our_more/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by MrWedge18: Natural selection works via life and death. If a trait decreased your chance of survival, then you're less likely to be alive enough to have kids and pass it on. And vice versa for positive traits. 

With modern medicine, a sedentary lifestyle and a large appetite probably won't kill you. At least not before you reproduce. So it still gets passed down.
  Comment by Lithuim: It takes many generations of selective pressure to produce significant change in the species.

Humans haven’t been sedentary for more than two or three generations, and even then the selective pressure isn’t significant - most of those people are still having kids before their enlarged hearts explode.
  Comment by joemondo: In addition to what others are saying, in the US at least a lot of people aren't eating out of hunger, but habit and boredom and a desire to sedate themselves.
  Comment by treemanswife: We are.  It's just that modern processed food/lifestyle tricks your brain into eating more than you really need.  

If you eat less-processed food and have days with varying activity levels you will 100% notice that you eat different amounts of food.
  Comment by MyNamesArise: Look up how insulin blocks the signals to our brains to indicate we are full. Our body had a system for regulating appetite that worked for millions of years, but the introduction of high sugar foods have overrun our brains natural appetite and made that system almost completely ineffective over the last century or two 

*I am not a doctor just a guy on Reddit

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5 choosing stock options versus RSUs
Author: TheAngryPenguin23
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18s80l8/eli5_choosing_stock_options_versus_rsus/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by rabbiskittles: AFAIK, it would only be if they offer you more options than shares. 10 RSUs will definitely be worth more than 10 options, but usually it will be something more like 10 RSUs or 20 options. So then you have to decide if you think the share price will reach ~2x your exercise (“strike”) price to determine which is “better”.

My personal opinion is, unless you *really* believe your company’s share price will skyrocket AND you don’t need the liquid cash anytime soon, RSUs are safer. But I’m not an expert.
  Comment by Twenty_One_Pylons: If you believe the value of the stock is liable to increase from the strike price between the day you’re issued the options and the day you exercise the options. 

If the share price is higher than the strike price, you can functionally buy shares of that company at a discount vs current market value
  Comment by nunley: I've had ISO Options, NQ Options, RSUs and Stock Grants, but I've never been presented a choice between them.  It's usually determined by what stage the company is in, but not always.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Why is it an issue if a country has a low fertility rate? (Ex: Germany, Korea, China)
Author: RamblingRanter
Score: 6
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18s7f72/eli5_why_is_it_an_issue_if_a_country_has_a_low/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by xboxhobo: Old people need to be supported. If you have more young people than old people this is fine. If you have more old people than young people this is not fine.
  Comment by thecuriousiguana: If people have fewer children, each generation is smaller than the last. That quickly becomes a problem

If you have 10 million people over the age of 60 and 8 million people under the age of 60, you have fewer people paying the taxes that fund the pensions than you have getting paid a pension. You have fewer people available to work in health care with more people requiring it.

Other things start to happen too. Smaller towns and villages die because the population isn't enough to sustain them, or because the small number of young people need to leave. As the economically productive population shrinks fewer people are eating out, staying I'm hotels, shopping etc. Those industries shrivel and die. 

It'll keep getting worse as each generation gets smaller.

You need each woman to have slightly over 2 children to maintain a stable population. South Korea and Japan are down to less than one.

Now, you're right that the global birth rate is more than 2. But it's no use to an old woman in a care home in Tokyo if a family in Nigeria has 6 kids.
  Comment by triscuitsrule: Elder care.

Historically, people have lots of kids and as you mentioned, in underdeveloped parts of the world today people still tend to have larger families. However, as a population modernizes (better healthcare, longer lifespans, equitability of education, opportunity, and wealth, etc.) people tend to have smaller families. The more a population modernizes the smaller average family sizes get until they reach about 1.5-2, which is just under or at the replacement rate.

The rate of modernization poses problems though. If a country modernizes quite quickly, which they usually do, then there will be a bunch of old people to take care of, whom the public didn’t historically have to contend with as people didn’t usually live that long. The way most countries address this issue of elder care is through robbing Peter to pay Paul, that is collecting taxes from workers to afford elder care- redistributing wealth from workers to retirees. And this system works great, until there’s less Peter’s around (workers) than Pauls (elderly people) and/or financial mismanagement occurs. 

So, as a population ages and modernizes, people have smaller families, but all those people from the good ole days when you had six brothers and sisters are still around and sucking up resources via elder care. The more resources they suck up, the less there is for everybody else and it puts quite a burden on the public and economy overall. 

Which, as a quick aside, typically as this system is implemented, the outsized larger, older generations, pay into the system as they age even though there’s not as many retirees as modernization hasn’t taken off fully. That money generally is saved and can help offset the eventual imbalance when family sizes shrink. However, in countries like the United States, previous presidential administrations and Congresses (cough cough, Raegan) have “raided” those funds to provide the appearance of a balanced budget or cutting spending. This further throws the issue of elder care into uncertainty as the intended buffer is no longer there. 

So, in all it comes down to how to finance taking care of the elderly and that most all countries, afaik, have created a system to do so that is reliant upon economic and population growth. If that economic and population growth slows, and there aren’t proper guardrails to accommodate it, then the system fails. 

Theoretically, if a population stabilized for a very long time, (realistically once after all the outsized older generations die off) then this won’t be much of an issue anymore as the imbalance of retirees to laborers evens out. But until then, it’s going to continue getting much worse and seriously impacting economies, government funding priorities, burden on the workforce, etc. etc. lest governments find a better way to finance elder care, or give up on providing elder care, scale back elder care, or their demographics even out.
  Comment by GotMoFans: Because you need to people to replace the old and dead to keep the nation going.

If you have a bunch of old people who can’t work and not enough young people replacing them, your nation’s economy can grind to a halt.
  Comment by sleepingsysadmin: Retirement is a pyramid scheme. It's a relatively new thing to humanity to be so widely available. It was only viable because population was increasing. More and more people paying into it. 

With population decline, retirement can't continue to exist. But a great deal of older folks were betting on it still existing.   

Oops.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: Eli5 how can some diseases like HIV stay in your system for life?
Author: BigDickDevin117
Score: 18
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18s76o9/eli5_how_can_some_diseases_like_hiv_stay_in_your/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by tyler1128: HIV lives in your white blood cells, which are made to defeat viruses. If your own white blood cells are infected by HIV, and burst releasing many copies of the virus after a while, it's hard to have your immune system to remove it. Another virus that says for life is the one that causes chickenpox in youth and singles when you are older. It lives in neural cells and white blood cells can't see them until they start to release. Some viruses are very good at hiding in places white blood cells aren't common.
  Comment by iohognbdfh11: HIV is a retrovirus. This means the virus converts its own RNA genome into DNA and then inserts that DNA into the host cells genome. It basically modifies your own cells genome and those modified cells aren't attacked by your immune system because they're still your own cells. It's basically making itself part of you.
  Comment by PlaceWild579: Sorry if this is off topic but is there any chance science discover if Covid behaves at all like HIV? (Asking as I’ve heard more and more about Covid damaging immune systems, long covid etc.)
  Comment by The_RealKeyserSoze: HIV integrates into the genome of the cells it infects. You would have to destroy the infected white blood cells and bone marrow stem cells to eliminate HIV which the immune system tries, but fails to do. This has been done a few times with radiation and bone marrow transplants and it is curative but its very dangerous and not necessary. HIV treatments can eliminate all of the extracellular viruses so it is undetectable, however the viral DNA is still present in those cells genomes so the virus will come back if treatment is stopped.
  Comment by oblivious_fireball: HIV is unusual in that it attacks your immune system, the system meant to kill foreign invaders. This makes it tricky to deal with as your own weapons are food for the virus.

Herpes family viruses hide out in your nerve cells without actually destroying them. As a result your immune system can't get to them and instead plays a continuous game of whack-a-mole during flair-ups as viruses are released into other cells when the body is stressed or weakened.

Tuberculosis similarly directly attacks cells from your own immune system, and encourages the formation granulomas which normally are used by the immune system to isolate and destroy pathogens, but in this case protect the bacteria from targeted destruction. Infections tend to lay low until the body is weakened or stressed and they then come out of hiding to cause an active infection.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: How did we go about establishing time zones internationally?
Author: gdp1
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18s6uh4/eli5_how_did_we_go_about_establishing_time_zones/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by dirschau: Delegates from a bunch of countries, importantly including all the established and emerging powers, [got together in Washington D.C. on 22 October 1884](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Meridian_Conference) and decided that Greenwich is Prime Meridian, with time +/- 0 hours, and all timezones radiate out from there.

150 years since, everyone still works by that ruling, although countries have in that time changed the shapes of the official zones within their borders, according to their desires. Some, like China decided their entire country has one time zone (that of Beijing in their case).
  Comment by RonPossible: Most places kept their own time, usually marking noon by the solar zenith (the time the sun is highest in the sky), or started the day at dawn, as the Romans did.  Standardized time wasn't important. 

The Royal Observatory established Greenwich Mean Time.  This kept a standard time for mariners to keep and figure out their longitude.  This became very important when accurate timekeeping devices were invented. 

US railroads used their own time, usually based on their headquarters location.  This kept all trains belonging running to them on the same time, but different from another company's trains.

The International Meridian Conference in 1884 established the Greenwich Meridian as the common reference for those countries at the conference. It didn't establish time zones, but at least everyone agreed on which day it was.

By 1900, most every country had established their own time zones, if not always based on GMT.

In 1917, Anglo-French Conference on Time-keeping at Sea set how ships at sea, outside of a country's territorial waters, keep time. That's based on 15° divisions of the globe, and mostly used for communication. Internally, ships keep any convenient time.

Today, all time zones are based on Coordinated Universal Time, which was adopted in the 1960s.  But every country sets their own time zone. There's no international agreements other than those mentioned. China, for example, has only one time zone, so in far Western China, the Sun is at zenith at around 1500 in the afternoon.

Time zones, and the International Date Line, get pretty wonky. There's island chains that span vast distances that should be on different times and even different days, but keep common time with other parts of their country.
  Comment by stylesmckenzie: I mean we don't, any country is perfectly allowed to set their time zone or zones however they'd like. However given how interconnected the world has been in the last 100 or so years there's a strong pressure to set up convenient time zones. Any country could set up their time zone to be 17 minutes off from UTC, but all that would do is make communication and coordination with other countries harder. So that's why most time zones are  set up to be 1, 2, 3 etc hours off from UTC, with a few exceptions that use half hour increments.
  Comment by gdp1: Thank you for the thoughtful response. How did you know all that?
  Comment by RonPossible: I drink, and I know things.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5, CPU and OS relation, and which one has more control over a computer
Author: Original_Ad6105
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18s6ayf/eli5_cpu_and_os_relation_and_which_one_has_more/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by RhynoD: When people call the CPU the brain, they mean it's the physical object. It's the collection of neurons that makes the thing you can hold in your hand, the fleshy bits. The Operating System is the *thoughts* of the brain, the signals and patterns that travel through the physical object that is the brain. A little more accurately, the OS is the memories and personality which "inhabit" the brain. You can't have one without the other. A CPU without an OS is just silicon that doesn't do anything. An OS without a CPU to run on is just a set of instructions for what to do with a computer but without a computer to do anything with.
  Comment by finalbosss20: To ELI5 this, 

CPU does calculations. Computer, if you start to demystify it, is just a switch. There's power from outlet, or there's not - you can turn computer on and off. That's the basic 0 and 1.

With logical gates (switches), you can divide this power/current into different paths, and logical gates turn power on and off in those paths. CPU has transistors which do this logic - which is basically calculations. 

Logical gates are... easy way to think about this is AND switch for example. It passes power when two inputs both receive power. Imagine that you take a sausage-shaped balloon and a marker. Write number 1 on each end, and number 2 in the middle. If you squeeze ends with "1", the middle inflates, showing "2". You just turned balloon into [AND](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=INEtYZqtjTo&ab_channel=SpanningTree) switch and did maths on it - 1+1 = 2. But if you only squeeze this or another end, middle doesn't inflate enough. This is basically example about how even simple switch builds up into complex logic. CPUs have billions of them.

Now, in addition to CPU, computer has memory and storage and other devices. OS is what controls it all, usually by drivers (separate bits of software that have set instructions for each part). OS can read them, manage storage and translate information between hardware and software. Also, display it to computer user via monitor and get input from input devices, like keyboard and mouse.

In this picture, CPU has no "control" over a computer. It's an engine of a city bus - but being such, it still manages or is dependent upon oil and water and electricity and turns the wheels so forth - so it's definitely doing the whole driving, hardware drivers are the dashboard, and bus driver is the OS - that's actually guiding the driving. And passengers are the computer users who can tell the driver (OS) where they want to go and when to stop.
  Comment by thenormaluser35: The CPU can only execute instructions like adding,  subtracting, and so on.
The OS is really just a huge program that hosts and manages other programs. It can be very simple, like on a cheap smartwatch, or very complex, like Windows, Linux and MacOS.
The OS is like the driver of a car, but the CPU is the engine, a car with no driver can technically drive, although only forward. A car with a driver can perform way more things, even if the driver's good or bad, just like the OS.
  Comment by MOS95B: The OS "controls" the computer. The CPU *basically* just translates what the OS says into languages the different parts of the computer can understand. Without an OS, the CPU is just a fancy piece of silicon and metal. We call it the brain in much the same way our brains translate noise and other input into language and tactile sensation. It's not a perfect comparison, but one that a layman can usually understand.
  Comment by nitrohigito: Going to go against the grain here for a bit and address the question directly, because it can actually be addressed: the CPU is more in control between the two, but not necessarily over the entire computer. This is how you can have virtual machines for example, or how you can wake on LAN. But the CPU also doesn't typically care about most other components in the system, so it's a narrow type of control (usually).

To elaborate a bit more, hardware is always king. They can relinquish control to code passing through them, but internally, they can do whatever. A modern CPU in itself is a full-on computer, with a multitude of even smaller computers inside. They even have a bit of internal storage holding proprietary code and data called microcode.

Same applies to most other components in a system really. You'll have a south bridge that's likely an ARM-based system-on-a-chip. You'll have a network chip, likely MIPS or ARM. You'll have a control unit for your SSD, HDD or ODD, all typically entire computers on their own right. The GPU is also like this, and also ships with microcode inside.

Each and every layer on top of this assortment of devices is beholden to the layers under them to pinky promise do what they ask them to, and not more, nor less. The OS is the layer then that takes it all on and manages the entire thing. **It's like a company.** The workers will be the ones hands on, and so technically they have the highest level of control over their own thing and could conspire, but the management is in charge typically and overall.

For the brain thing, that's just because the CPU is where most code is executed. GPUs also work hard, but hierarchy wise they are secondary devices to the CPU. The architecture of the PC is CPU-centric, and so the CPU is like the brain. Though even this is a bit of a lie, because you can have multiple CPUs in a system, the system can still operate to a certain extent without any CPU installed, the CPU isn't the first component to power on, etc.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Why do some parent's DNA dominate their partner's DNA in their offspring?
Author: OccamsComb
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18s5zmh/eli5_why_do_some_parents_dna_dominate_their/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by tdscanuck: The genetics are always a 50/50 mix. It's only a very very very small portion of our DNA that drives visible traits. If skin tone, hair color, eye color, and facial structure happen to be dominant from one parent then the kid is going to look a lot like that parent even if 99%+ of their dominant genes are actually coming from the other parent.
  Comment by maryland_cookies: This is mainly due to dominant and recessive genes. Kids are a 50 50 mix of their parents but let's take eyes for example. Brown eyes are a dominant gene, so out compete blue eyes which are recessive - if one parent has blue and one has brown, the child will have brown. If one parent has all dominant traits, then the child will probably inherit these traits and look more like that parent!

The environment also can play a role in how someone looks as they grow up, food type and climate etc... (this is known as phenotype). The way I think of phenotype is like, whilst two pizza's can be made of the same ingredients and ratios, depending on how the dough is proofed and the pizza cooked, they can taste and look totally different!

Even more ELI5 detail on how dominant and recessive works - basically we have genes, and genes code for traits. But some traits are actually specifically from a lack of a gene coding for it. Basically, Say we have an empty field, this is you, and when your parents do the dirty they basically both throw their copies of blueprints at you. Your mums blueprint tells you to make a park and basically leave the field as it is so you do that first. But then your dad's blueprints tell you to turn it into a factory so you do that next. If both parents had told you to make a nature reserve and not touch the field then it would remain empty and that's what the world who see. But an empty field is overshadowed the moment even 1 factory blueprint shows up making it recessive to the factory blueprint.

The real world example of this is cystic fibrosis. Basically in our lungs is a little pump of sorts that helps keep things moving and soft and healthy. Genes either make a working pump, or rarely make a faulty pump. If you get two working pump genes then awesome no problem. If you get one of each well it doesn't matter that you have a few faulty ones because you still have working ones as well. But if you get both faulty ones then it finally shows as disease. This is why cystic fibrosis is a recessive trait.
  Comment by csl512: Here's the Khan Academy section on it: https://www.khanacademy.org/science/ap-biology/heredity/mendelian-genetics-ap/v/introduction-to-heredity

One of many videos for "mendel peas": https://youtu.be/lpObkqMb2_0

It's helpful to use the simplest traits for teaching.

Piggybacking so I don't have to write more lol
  Comment by eliz1bef: It's funny, both of my parents have brown eyes, and I have blue/grey eyes.  I'm definitely their kid.
  Comment by sf_sf_sf: Your parents have “BROWN-gray” and “BROWN-gray” genes and you got “gray-gray” genes. One from each parent. 

Since they have a dominant Brown their eyes are brown even though they also have a gray since Brown is dominant. 

Simplified since eye color is a little more complex than that but it’s the general idea.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Why did the majority of West Africans from the Trans Atlantic Slave Trade not die from diseases upon entering their new environments? Native Americans were decimated by Europeans from diseases like small pox, but I've never heard of this happening with the African Slaves
Author: SecretAntWorshiper
Score: 106
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18s53v7/eli5_why_did_the_majority_of_west_africans_from/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Lithuim: Sub-Saharan Africa was remote by European standards but it wasn’t totally disconnected from international trade either.  Trade routes from the Middle East had been making it down the Nile for millennia and Africans had exposure to the various diseases of Eurasia.

The Native Americans did not practice extensive animal domestication so they didn’t develop the same roster of dangerous and novel animal-to-human viruses that the old world had.

That said, the survival rate for African slaves sent to the Caribbean and south/central America wasn’t great either.  It was just better than the natives, who ended up completely depopulated.
  Comment by bobroberts1954: The peoples of the Americas didn't, as I understand it, have domesticated food animals. The diseases that the Europeans brought there resulted from them jumping from the animals to the humans and mutating from there, so the Americans never encountered such diseases. The people of Africa did keep and live with their domesticated stock.
  Comment by kmosiman: North and South America were isolated from Europe, Africa, and Asia. The Americas also had no large farm animals. Most diseases are caused by animal to human cross over (bird flu, swine flu, etc.). 

Europe, Africa, and Asia are interconnected so diseases would eventually spread everywhere through the trade routes. This meant that the populationd of those areas were all somewhat resistant to the diseases. 

The population of the Americas weren't so they had no natural Immunity to diseases from the rest of the world.
  Comment by NotAnotherEmpire: Smallpox, the big killer, was endemic to the entire Old World. The first evidence of it is in Egyptian mummies dating to 1500 BC. Not that smallpox outbreaks didn't happen in the North American colonies, but they couldn't attack everyone because most already had survived it. 

The destruction in the Americas is because smallpox is very deadly and everyone was vulnerable. Measles and mumps are also not trivial if you get them as an adult - which again was not possible for most Old World adults.

The children however, enslaved and colonists, could absolutely catch these things and, well, that's where the adult survivor bias comes from.
  Comment by Prasiatko: I mean loads of them did. But there were still plenty more that could be imported to replace the loses.

Life expectancy on plantations was about 20-25 years and the fatality rate during the "seasoning" period after slaves disembarked could be as high as 50%.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Let’s say I’m accused of murder. What’s the difference between getting a public defender, an attorney a middle-class person could afford, and OJ’s legal team?
Author: gdp1
Score: 338
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18s5b24/eli5_lets_say_im_accused_of_murder_whats_the/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Carloanzram1916: There are two factors at play: the amount of time the lawyer will have for you and the skill level of the attorney. On the premise that most people like to earn as much money as they can for their job, the best lawyers will be able to charge the most money. So it’s more likely than not that the more money you have to pay a lawyer, the more skilled that lawyer will be.

The other factor is time. You are essentially paying an attorney for their time, which typically costs hundreds of dollars an hour. The amount you’ll be able to pay a middle class lawyer won’t be enough for them to abandon the rest of their practice and dedicate all their working hours towards you. They can spend time searching for needles in a haystack. Without the massive team OJ had, it’s unlikely that even a good lawyer would’ve ever found the tapes of Mark Fermin making racial slurs. It was buried in obscurity and would’ve stayed that way without teams of people looking into everyone’s backgrounds. The tape probably tainted the jury more than any of the actual evidence. You also have these things called “expert witnesses” who can testify on your behalf regarding certain evidence. These experts can give really compelling testimony to either strengthen or undermine evidence in a case. But they usually cost thousands if not tens of thousands of dollars. 

A public defender is not necessarily a bad lawyer but they’ll be overworked. You will be one of dozens of clients they have. In some cases where murder convict were later exonerated, it was found that the public defender only spent a couple of hours working in their case before trial.
  Comment by Zappavishnu: With more access to money you have more access to better lawyers who can afford a team of the best experts and professionals money can buy. Our public defender system is overloaded with cases and under supplied with lawyers. Most of the time they advise you to just plead out and take a lesser punishment even if you know you are innocent.
  Comment by Alexdagreallygrate: You can post this in r/publicdefenders and see what my brethren think. 

I’ll say it depends a lot on which jurisdiction the case is in. If it’s a federal case, then full time federal public defenders are some of the best lawyers out there, but the cases are extremely serious and there’s probably a mountain of evidence. 

If the case is in state court, it could depend on a myriad of factors. How well does the state or local jurisdiction fund public defense? Is the public defender employed by the government or are they a private or nonprofit firm on a contract? Are their caseload limits that are enforced? Does the public defender have access to social workers, investigators, or expert witnesses?
  Comment by guhbe: Others have given good responses but I'll add that it also really depends on how much evidence the state has against you.  If the crime was videotaped and they have four credible witnesses who can identify you as the perpetrator and your fingerprints are the only ones in the murder weapon, etc, you have no witnesses to vouch for you being somewhere else eg, the differences probably won't be all that substantial.  Of course there is a lot a good legal team can do even against overwhelming odds and if you have the money to spend they could likely muddy the waters enough or throw up enough challenges to the admissibility of some evidence, get a psychiatrist to diagnose some mental condition that reduces culpability, etc etc, and you could well get a better plea deal offered than with a cheaper atty or public defender.  But there's only so much even the best lawyers can do when faced with enough adverse facts and a trial may just be unwinnable.
  Comment by teguca: Big plans for the holidays?

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Commercial Airplane wing's shape
Author: SuperRusso
Score: 5
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18s4zfd/eli5_commercial_airplane_wings_shape/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by tdscanuck: Wing design is all about minimizing fuel burn (drag) while letting the airplane do everything else it needs to do (lift the airplane, hold the engines, go fast enough, etc.). 

One of the biggest levers to reducing drag on wings is something called "aspect ratio", basically how long & thin the wing is. The longer and thinner, the lower a particular type of drag called "induced drag". This is why gliders have ridiculously long/thin wings. Commercial airlines can't be \*that\* long and thing due to other constraints but they still want to be as wide and thin as they can be. 

However...decades ago the industry agreed on a set of standard sizes for airplanes so that the airports knew what to do with gates and runway and taxiway widths and such. These come from a group called ICAO (International Civil Aviation Organization) and are referred to as "Codes". Any Code C airplane will fit in any Code C airport and gate. You can read all about that here: [https://skybrary.aero/articles/icao-aerodrome-reference-code](https://skybrary.aero/articles/icao-aerodrome-reference-code) but the important part, for our purposes, is that the most popular and ubiquitous airliners (Boeing 737 and Airbus A320) are Code C, which imposes a maximum wingspan of 36m.

This didn't use to be much of an issue, but as airliners got larger and larger and engineers got better and better at designing wings they could go to larger and larger spans (for lower drag) but fairly soon they bumped up against the 36m boundary. Something similar happened for very large aircraft (Code E) later in time.

So now they have a dilemna...leave the wing with as much span as it can have, and accept worse efficiency than you could otherwise have, or make the wing bigger (and push it up to Code D, which massively limits which gates you can use at the airport), or find a way to make the wing aerodynamically act like it's got more span than it really does. And that's what all those tip treatments are for. You can swoop the tip back (787, A350), you can put a flat pate out there (A320), you can bend the tip up (most 737s, A320neos, MD-11, later 747s), you can split the tip (some retrofit 737s and all new ones). They're all aerodynamics tricks to make the wing behave like it's wider than it actually is. 777X just said "F it" and folds the wingtips so it's got less span on the ground than it does in the air.
  Comment by Spiritual_Jaguar4685: As I always say: "There are more than 1 ways to skin a cat, but once you know 5 or 6 suddenly no one wants to ride an Uber with you"

The wingtip devices to which you are referring serve a variety of purposes, they can reduce drag on the wing, they can help balance the wing, they can even just serve as a surface to mount lights and sensors upon. 

In then end there are just lots and lots of ways to design a wing and engineers will just go with what works. It's not fair to say one specific design performs universally better than others so sometimes you get flat wings, sometimes you curved up wingtips, sometimes you wings that end in little T's.
  Comment by Gnonthgol: What you are looking at is called winglets. They are devices to reduce drag and therefore fuel consumption. With a traditional wing design the air is able to go around the tip from the underside to the top side of the wing. The outermost end of the wing is therefore not contributing much to the lift but still contributes to drag. In order to save fuel the airliner would have liked to extend the wings but they are not allowed to due to space restrictions at the airports. But they are allowed to extend the wing tip upwards, or downwards. This prevents the air from flowing around the wing tip and means that the outermost part of the wing contributes fully to lifting the aircraft. And this helps the fuel economy.

The reason for the different shapes is that there is currently active development in this field. And the different airplane models are different so might be best suited with different winglets. In addition it is the airliners who fit the winglets, not the airplane manufacturer. So different airliners end up buying different winglets.
  Comment by SoulWager: When flying, the bottom of the wing has higher pressure than the top, providing lift. This also makes the air want to take a shortcut sideways around the tip of the wing, creating a tip vortex. Air that does this adds drag, but not lift. Winglets can prevent some of that air from forming a vortex, or recover some energy from the air that does. You can also just make the wing longer and skinnier, but that makes ground operations more difficult. There are a whole lot of reasons you might pick one over the other, including how efficient they are, what you were able to simulate when designing the plane, how hard it is to manufacture, ground clearance, weight, affect on ground effect, impact on handling characteristics, etc.

In general, it's a called a [wingtip device](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wingtip_device).
  Comment by SuperRusso: I had not even considered a regulation situation with this, but it makes total sense we'd need to standardize wingspans.  I really appreciate you for responding, this is fascinating to me...

> to make the wing behave like it's wider than it actually is.

Thank you, this kind of abstraction works very well for my understanding.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: [ELI5] What is the relation of sugar, carbohydrates, and calories and how a drink like Zero Coke can have 0g of both and still have a 0.2 kCalories? Where are these calories coming from?
Author: CoolAppz
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18s4uuy/eli5_what_is_the_relation_of_sugar_carbohydrates/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by RhynoD: Carbohydrates is a broad category of energy-dense organic molecules made of carbon (carbo-), hydrogen (hydr-), and oxygen (-ate). Sugar is one kind of carbohydrate. 

Note that calories (lower case) and Calories (upper case) are different. Capital C Calorie is a shorthand for kcal or 1000 small c calories. A small c calorie is a measure of energy that is defined as the amount needed to raise one gram of water 1°C.

US food label laws allow some margin of error in testing and labeling, so that companies are allowed to round down a certain amount. Famously, this meant there was a time when Tictacs were labeled as 0 sugar despite being made of like 90% sugar, because the serving amount was so low that the sugar was below what was allowed to be rounded down. They have long since amended the law to recognize more accurate testing and disallow such flagrant use of a loophole.

That means Coke Zero (and anything else) can still be labeled as zero calories as long as it's below the threshold set by law. I'm not seeing a source for Coke Zero having *any* calories, though. 

Regardless, Coke Zero does not contain sugar of any kind. Instead, the main sweetener is aspartame, which is made of a couple of amino acids. Your tongue isn't very smart and although the sweetness detectors evolved to detect sugar, they can be fooled. Aspartame is one such fooler, which tastes sweet even though it isn't sugar. Your body breaks it down into those amino acids, but those don't contribute any meaningful amount of energy.
  Comment by Hayred: Coke Zero is sweetened with aspartame. Aspartame has 4kcal/gram, same as carbohydrate and protein (as mentioned in the other comment, it is chemically a tiny peptide). It's just a lot sweeter, so you use less. According to wikipedia, Coke Zero contains 0.087 grams of aspartame per 100ml.

4kcal \* 0.087g = 0.348kcal, which you can round down to 0.3, which matches the nutritional information for Coke Zero on the label in my country.
  Comment by ColSurge: Just for some extra details here, calories are reported in increments of 10 on labeling (US). That's why you never see something with say 322 calories per serving.

So if there are 5 or less calories per serving, that can be rounded down to 0 calories.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: Eli5 what causes one to have a fast or slow metabolism? How does this work
Author: Junior_Chocolate_803
Score: 5
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18s471b/eli5_what_causes_one_to_have_a_fast_or_slow/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by ZeroFucksGiven-today: Great question- genes, muscle mass, fat mass, TDEE, BMR, TEF, all play a role in “metabolism” speed.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Why does storing foods with different odors affect flavor?
Author: footdegen
Score: 2
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18s45i6/eli5_why_does_storing_foods_with_different_odors/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Moose_Dragoon: Smell is nothing more or less than molecules moving through the air.  And most of what you consider taste is actually smell.  

So if you put 2 different foods that each have volatile ingredients in a refrigerator, each of them will have some of the molecules leave and start moving through the air, which is why you can smell them in the first place.  But inevitably some of those molecules will settle on the other food, and they will change how it tastes as a result.
  Comment by footdegen: Thank you! There are people in my home who argue it has no effect at all and it drives me crazy lol.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Why does a swimming pool feel cold initially but warm after a while?
Author: chonkydallas
Score: 1062
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18s382k/eli5_why_does_a_swimming_pool_feel_cold_initially/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Blastercorps: Technically, your body does not have the ability to sense how hot/cold other things are. You sense temperature by how much your own skin changes in temperature. So you were very warm on a summer day, touching cold water chilled your skin greatly and you felt that. But then you stayed in the water, and your body cooled down, and now your skin temperature isn't that far off from the water. It's not changing much so you don't sense it anymore.

This same effect is why you feel so cold with a fever. The air is now cooler than your skin making you feel cold, when it wasn't the air rust changed.
  Comment by vbpatel: The temperature you feel isn’t really about the actual temperature of your environment (the water in the pool).  It’s about the rate of energy transfer.  If the pool is much colder than your skin, the rate of transfer is high, so you feel cold.  Once you’ve been in the pool for a while, your skin temp has already come down so the rate is slower, so you don’t feel as cold.

A side tip, if you cool down the water in your shower a bit before you finish, when you step out you will feel less cold because your skin isn’t super warm from the hot shower
  Comment by bigvalen: A few things people forgot to mention; when you are exposed to cold air/water, your body shrinks small blood vessels near the skin, to reduce heat loss through the skin. Once this is complete, your body gets used to the cold, as it's not a serious threat to losing heat anymore.

All warm blooded animals can generate heat from sugar in their liver. When you have been cool for a while, your body ramps up the amount of heat generated. But it's not instant..
  Comment by Moose_Dragoon: You acclamate.  The single biggest change is that you reduce the amount of blood going to your extremities so that you do not lose heat as quickly.  

You don't really feel how hot or cold the environment is.  What you feel is how quickly you are gaining or losing heat.  So when you make some adjustments so that you are not losing heat as fast you don't feel as cold.
  Comment by Omnizoom: Thermodynamics 

It’s very similar to why a metal table and a plastic table can both be 18c but the metal one feels so much colder, and that’s heat capacity and conductance.

Water is great at storing heat and it also conducts it fairly well this means water can pull a lot of heat energy out of you very fast making it feel like it’s colder then the air

--------------------------------------------------

Title: [ELI5] How do the magnets in the Magic Kingdom’s People Mover attraction actually propel the vehicles smoothly and at various speeds along the course?
Author: jedzz-reddit
Score: 16
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18s381o/eli5_how_do_the_magnets_in_the_magic_kingdoms/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by dwkeith: They are electromagnets. The magnets on the track energize in sequence, creating the force on demand, which pulls the cars forward. Same way an electric motor works, just flattened into the track to create linear motion directly.

See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_propulsion
  Comment by Moose_Dragoon: Magnet switch on and off.  So when they want you to start moving forwards they switch on the magnet in front of you, which pulls you a little bit, then turn it off before you are on top of it.   Then the next one in front of you turns on and keeps you moving.
  Comment by FaultySage: Also explained here in a recent Chapter of Dr. Stone. https://www.viz.com/shonenjump/dr-stone-4d-science-chapter-2/chapter/41200

Edit: Thought that would direct link to the page. The electromagentic propulsion starts around page 27.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5 how and why would otherwise perfectly parallel lines intersect at infinity?
Author: _lclarence
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18s33fq/eli5_how_and_why_would_otherwise_perfectly/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Zubon102: Are you talking about in Euclidean space?
Because the very definition of parallel lines is that they don't intersect at any point.
  Comment by Captain-Griffen: Assuming they're lines on a flat plane, they wouldn't. They also would never reach infinity to intersect there.

What's the context? It sounds like you've misunderstood something. You may be thinking of projective geometry? If you look at train tracks, they seem to get close together as they go into the distance, even though the tracks are the same width.
  Comment by NoLifeHere: "Points at infinity" are only really a thing in projective space.

We'll look at the projective plane, we use 3 co-ordinates to describe a point in that plane, \[x:y:z\] for some (let's say real) numbers x,y,z, but in projective space we say that for every number t that's not 0, \[x:y:z\] and \[tx:ty:tz\] are the same point.

What we can do is take some point in the normal plane (x/z, y/z) and map it to some point in the projective plane \[x:y:z\].

Note that (tx/tz, ty/tz) = (x/z, y/z), giving some justification for saying that \[x:y:z\] and \[tx:ty:tz\] are the same point for every t that's not 0.

The "points at infinity" are just the points \[x:y:0\] so in some sense the name comes from the fact we're sorta, but not really, dividing by zero.

Now I'm gonna write down some parallel lines, in a slightly odd way, we'll let m be their slope, (clearly these lines must have the same slope since they're parallel) and (x/z,y/z) be their intersection point.

(y/z)=m(x/z)+b, (y/z)=m(x/z)+c

m(x/z)+b=m(x/z)+c

mx+bz=mx+cz

bz=cz

z(b-c) = 0

if b-c=0 then b=c and they are in fact the same line. So for them to be different lines we want z=0, in "normal" co-ordinates this leads to a divide by zero error meaning that in fact they do not intersect. Moving into projective space though gives us the point \[x:y:0\] which is a "point at infinity"

Edit: formatting and making a point a bit more clear.
  Comment by PanzerAal: If the space the lines are in is curved, then it becomes possible for parallel lines to either cross or diverge, depending on whether or not it's positive or negative curvature.
  Comment by rabbiskittles: I wonder if it’s one of those situations where, when done imprecisely (e.g. effectively dividing by 0), the math works out to “infinity”. This just underscores that infinity *cannot* and *should not* be thought of as just “a really high number”. It’s a concept. Something yielding an “answer” of infinity needs to be interpreted correctly (and maybe implies you did something wrong).

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: How does futures stabilize price?
Author: marty1885
Score: 2
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18s2tyt/eli5_how_does_futures_stabilize_price/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by jlcooke: The first futures (and options for that matter) were for agricultural outputs - corn, wheat, barley and the like. 

A farmer wanted/needed money to buy inputs (seed, equipment, fuel, labour) and getting money from a bank loan was expensive and not connected to the success of their crop. 

So they sold a future purchase contract at a discount rate to financiers who could then sell to the actual end buyers closer to the date of production. 

This stabilizes prices in a few ways:
 - increased market participants and increase volume of trading, which encourages “price discovery”
 - extends the trading time from far before production/delivery date allowing more time to “get the price right” before production 
 - by increasing assess to funds, more farmers can benefit from better technology, seeds, and other inputs to increase production 
 - the above items now encourages secondary industry of agricultural analytics to assist traders to the get the right price so they make the right decision to buy/sell
  Comment by jlcooke: Oh and I’ll add that these concepts can be applied to any underlying stock or asset. 

More data, more trading leads to better decisions and less speculation.
  Comment by Jewrisprudent: Agreed with your summary. There’s a huge advantage to having continuity in price discovery, and futures allow more data points at more points in time. This means there’s less price shock, because the market has been analyzing and participating in price discovery the whole way.

If you could only ever buy goods on the day you need them, you’ll have suppliers occasionally surprised to find out that all of their consumers have had a down year and don’t need as much as was produced, or consumers occasionally surprised to find out that there was a bad season and only half as much crop is available in this October as compared to last October.

Futures allows these things to bear out in the market as soon as the information is available, rather than waiting until the day a delivery is actually required.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Why do “Eco” washing cycles on washing machines and dishwashers etc take way more time than the regular/non-eco cycles?
Author: flora2252
Score: 343
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18s1iw2/eli5_why_do_eco_washing_cycles_on_washing/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Irishpanda1971: When washing things, there are 5 main factors that go into it: water, action, time, chemical, heat. Think of them like a pie chart divided into even sections. In order to reduce the size of one of those wedges, one or more of the others have to get larger to compensate. So if you are using cooler water (you have made the Heat wedge smaller) and/or less water (reducing the Water section), you may need more scrubbing or agitation to make up for it (making the Action wedge larger) and probably need to have it run longer as well (increasing the Time wedge). 

There are limits, of course, and the maker of the appliance has done testing to determine which combination of wedge sizes gets the best results after reducing the Heat and/or Water sections.
  Comment by Gnonthgol: In general they reduce the temperature on the water so they use less energy to heat the water. However colder water does not clean as well so they have to spend longer time cleaning to get rid of all the stains.
  Comment by Smoke_Water: is it actually running for the full 4 hours? I know our GE will have a 1 hour soak cycle. the total time is 1 hour and 20 minutes. it is using cold water and needs the soak time to pull the dirt out of the fabrics. so yes, while it does take longer, Its total running time is actually shorter. our GE dryer, when in Eco mode. will Cycle the heat coil on and off more frequently and use less heat to dry the clothing. while it  will tumble air dry for about 20 minutes longer, Power saving is about 15% more. It takes a lot of power to heat up the coils.
  Comment by treesareforhuggingg: Used to work for a washing machine manufacturer. The eco cycle is normally the cycle that is used to do the energy/water rating testing on (In my region we have the energy/water efficiency star ratings on them)When the machines are tested the need to pass the wash test and the energy and water ratings are determined using this cycle. Normally takes way longer than any of the other cycles to pass the wash test, and uses the least amount of water and power. A bit dodgy imo, but is the industry standard.
  Comment by Highlow9: The eco setting reduces the temperature of the water (saving heating energy) and the amount of water (also saving energy and water).

The lack of heat makes it clean worse, so the items need to be sprayed more.

The lower amount of water (depending on the design) makes it so that only one of the spraying arms can be turned on at the same time. Thus again requiring more time.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Why do photos uploaded from 2010 looks terrible now?
Author: uniquepopcorn
Score: 3
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18s0pmp/eli5_why_do_photos_uploaded_from_2010_looks/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by dr_xenon: Lower resolution on the image, processor ability, and lens quality have advanced in 13 years. Also, websites may have been using smaller or more compressed images to save space when storage and bandwidth were more expensive. 

Relative to the other pictures of the day, it was fine. Now you’re comparing a low res image to a higher quality image. The tech has just gotten that much better. 

Back when we all had CRT TVs we thought they looked just fine.  Compare the cheapest 4k to the best CRT and it’s gonna be a huge difference.
  Comment by tyler1128: Two things are going on.

1) Displays are much higher resolution now, and your average internet is much better now. This means we're used to high resolution images without a ton of compression these days. Part of it is getting used to the new standard, and part is that old displays generally weren't displaying as many pixels.

2) The more times a given image if it is lossy compressed like jpeg is modified, the more quality it'll lose. This is sometimes called bitrot.
  Comment by Gargomon251: It's lower resolution. And phones and some websites try to upscale photos so its harder to tell the difference. 

Nowadays, most people use pictures that are 2 megapixels or more.
  Comment by thenormaluser35: For those who say it's the camera, only in some cases, a photo taken with a DSLR in 2010 could look like a nokia 3310 now.
Why this happens?
For every picture you upload, the server allocates some space, and space costs money.
After some time of the picture losing popularity, the server compresses it, this happens every now and then.
Compression is achieved through an algorithm that takes a guess at what data to lose/delete while keeping the image the same, roughly. If this is applied 100 times for the lifespan of that picture, the picture ends up with lower resolution and compression artifacts.
If this wasn't a thing you'd have to either pay (Google Drive/Photos) or they'd have to pay for you, and no business will do that, otherwise they're going to run out of money as each person needs 5$(example) of storage.
  Comment by The_RealKeyserSoze: Even 13 years ago cameras took pictures with high enough resolution to look good on modern displays. A 1080 display is 2.5 MP, and 4k is 8 MP.  Even a cheap point and shoot from 2010 likely had 8 MP.

The difference is likely in compression and files being saved at lower resolution. Internet speeds were slower and storage costs were higher back then so websites were less likely to store high res images. Its hard to notice the low resolution on an older 1080 or 720 display.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Do I burn the same number of calories doing 10,000 steps at a leisurely pace vs 10k brisk walking?
Author: bershka321
Score: 648
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18s0hmc/eli5_do_i_burn_the_same_number_of_calories_doing/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by 0000GKP: Increasing your heart rate increases the number of calories you burn. If your brisk walking is brisk enough, it can make a measurable difference. How much of a difference would depend on your heart rate and how long you sustained that elevated rate.
  Comment by Twin_Spoons: Moving quickly is inefficient compared to a leisurely walk. It's metabolically inefficient in that it increases your heart rate and perhaps requires anerobic processes. It can also be mechanically inefficient because you're using extra energy to lift yourself further off the ground or keep yourself balanced as you move. Both of these inefficiencies mean more energy is needed for the same number of strides, so you burn more calories. 

The mechanical difference is most obvious when comparing walking to running. Running is a different motion from walking that involves repeatedly launching yourself into the air and landing on just one foot. A "leisurely walk" compared to a "brisk walk" will be much closer. If the brisk walk still feels like a natural pace that you could sustain for hours, then it's probably not too different from a leisurely walk. If the increase in pace is enough to wind you or make your muscles ache, you're doing more work per stride.
  Comment by rosen380: [https://www.calculator.net/calories-burned-calculator.html](https://www.calculator.net/calories-burned-calculator.html)

&#x200B;

I guess I can't say how accurate that site is but using 150 pounds for body weight I get:

* Walking 1.0 MPH = 90 Calories per mile
* Walking 2.0 MPH = 72 Calories per mile
* Walking 3.0 MPH = 69 Calories per mile
* Walking 4.0 MPH = 84 Calories per mile
* Walking 5.0 MPH = 99 Calories per mile

&#x200B;

I was surprised by the shape of that curve.  I but I suppose since the faster walking speeds will be completed in less time, maybe worth figuring in "sitting quietly" for the time saved?

* Walking 1.0 MPH = 90 Calories
* Walking 2.0 MPH = 119 Calories
* Walking 3.0 MPH = 131 Calories
* Walking 4.0 MPH = 154 Calories
* Walking 5.0 MPH = 173 Calories

&#x200B;

I guess that feels a little more intuitive...?
  Comment by The_RealKeyserSoze: Running will burn more calories even if distance is equal because you have to use anaerobic metabolism in addition to aerobic and you get less energy from equal amounts of carbs when you do that.
  Comment by sweetbutcrazy: Running for 60 minutes burns more calories than walking for 60 minutes.  
Running X distance in 15 minutes burns basically the same amount of calories as walking X distance in 60 minutes.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: Eli5: Blood pressure
Author: RandomBookLover
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rzpqm/eli5_blood_pressure/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by EggsAndMilquetoast: It's literally as simple as picturing water running through a faucet. 

Imagine your kitchen faucet. You turn the handle just a little, and the water comes out at very low pressure. Picture your heart as the handle, regulating how fast the water comes out. So an increase in heart rate = an increase in blood pressure.

Now imagine having a lot of limescale built up on the mouth of the faucet, limiting the size of the hole that the water comes out. Picture the size of the hole as the diameter of your blood vessels. If the rate of flow remains the same, the narrower the hole, the more pressure is put on the liquid moving through it.

Now imagine you have a leak in your house and less water actually makes it to the tap. You turn the faucet, but the water is only coming out in a trickle because it's leaking out of a burst pipe somewhere else. This would be like what you asked: less water = less pressure. 

The reason that's a big deal when it's blood is because your blood carries oxygen around your body to give your tissues energy. Less blood means less oxygen. Less oxygen means less energy. Losing blood means losing the ability to move oxygen around your body. Lose enough, you eventually pass out and your brain starts starving for oxygen. By draining blood, you've solved the problem of high blood pressure by functionally asphyxiating yourself.
  Comment by Pocok5: High blood pressure tends to be a persistent condition. Your body will just re-make the blood you drained and you'll be back at square one. It would be treating a symptom and not the cause, and would have to be repeated regularly - at which point you'll also have the strain from losing a massive amount of blood and nutrients all the time.
  Comment by Sufficient-Sink-8569: Blood pressure is the force that your heart uses to pump blood around your body. It’s the pressure of circulating blood against the walls of blood vessels. Each time your heart beats, it pumps blood into arteries that carry blood throughout your body. Blood pressure is usually expressed in terms of the systolic pressure (maximum pressure during one heartbeat) over diastolic pressure (minimum pressure between two heartbeats) in the cardiac cycle.

Reducing the amount of blood in your body, or blood volume, is not a solution to high blood pressure and can lead to serious health problems. Hypovolemia is a condition that occurs when your body loses fluid, like blood or water. Symptoms of hypovolemia include weakness, fatigue, and dizziness. Treatment with IV fluids rehydrates and replenishes the fluid your body loses.
  Comment by iohognbdfh11: Yes, reducing blood volume will reduce your blood pressure. That's obviously not a solution to anything though as it's terrible for your body and will only temporarily reduce your blood pressure until your body responds.
  Comment by Carloanzram1916: The short answer is no. People who suffer from hypertension, (high blood pressure) usually have a problem with their veins and arteries losing their elasticity. Basically your blood vessels get wider and narrower to keep your blood pressure in an appropriate range. As you age they lose their flexibility so your pressure stays chronically high. The problem with simply removing blood is that your body needs that blood. It is sometimes managed in part with a medication that makes you pee alot to remove fluid but this only manages the problem. A person with high blood pressure doesn’t have too much blood, they have too much pressure in their blood vessels. So unfortunately, you can’t just remove the blood. Your body will compensate by constructing the vessels more.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5 When people talk about computer signals, what are the signals made of?
Author: ThinkTank02
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rzi21/eli5_when_people_talk_about_computer_signals_what/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by KillerOfSouls665: It depends, you can have analog signals and you can have digital signals. Dgital signals are made up of lots of pulsing on and offs so high voltage or low voltage. Whereas an analogue signal, is a continuously varying voltage. This is good to represent sound or other waves, as it requires no decoding. However is much more susceptable to noise and interference as the difference between slight changes is tiny compared to on and off.
  Comment by froetz: If systems communicate then it is really just a certain voltage (5V or 3,3V on microcontrollers for example) for „1“ and 0V for „0“. The information result in the „rhythm“ or the series of 1s and 0s. 
You can see the Binary-System where there are only 0 and 1 as digits but 1001 means 9 in decimal. So if you want to transfer a „9“, your datastream will contain this series with this signals + some signals to control the flow of data. 

In memorychips it is a bit more complex. As data is stored in simple capacitors or special circuits which will give a high or low voltage on the output depending on a short pulse on one of the two inputs which represent 1 or 0.
  Comment by kevleyski: Yeah a 1 or 0 is a change in voltage, depending in if going high (1) or dropping low or negative (0). This is done though billions (trillions?) of transistors which can switch high or low depending on their inputs for outputs of other transistors and arranging them in a certain gate array leads to the possibility of representing numbers/letters/graphics etc r even signals to other devices/computers

--------------------------------------------------

Title: Eli5: Why animals can't speak like humans?
Author: sigma-ohio-rizz
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rzb0y/eli5_why_animals_cant_speak_like_humans/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Erik912: The physiology of their vocal cords doesn't allow them to produce sounds necessary for complex human language. Their brains are also not capable of learning complex language. The best as far as I know are some chimps that were able to learn up to 300 words (not speaking them, but unserstanding their meanings and remembering the symbols associated with them).
  Comment by MansfromDaVinci: We're fairly sure the smarter, more social, dolphins have languages and dialects.  Elephants have some form of communication beyond normal animal mating calls and warnings, if transplanted to a different area elephants will have difficulty due to speaking a different dialect.  Some very smart birds can speak and understand human language at a toddler level.  Great apes can understand a larger vocabulary than tabloid newspapers, average dogs can learn 165 words, super intelligent dogs over 1000.  

However human brains are particularly set up to learn and use language and have sophisticated vocal chords.  It took millions of years of evolution to get both.
  Comment by my-cat-coleslaw: Certain birds can.  But they don’t understand the complexity of language. Also a gorilla was taught sign language but it couldn’t speak the words.
  Comment by TheJeeronian: We evolved alongside our language, so our brains and vocal systems are more or less designed specifically for speech. Animals don't have that, so even if they are vaguely able to understand our complex ideas or impersonate the sounds, no animal can do both.
  Comment by FossilizedMeatMan: This question is as good as "why can't we speak like other animals"?

Humans are animals that developed a fairly complex (by human standards) communication system. We use mostly visual and auditory stimuli to convey messages. When we speak, we modulate sounds with our vocal cords, creating sounds that make sense on the language we learned, although some sounds are pretty much universally understood (like screaming).

Other animals speak in other ways, more specifically to their abilities, needs and the environment they live. Whales emit sounds that our ears cannot hear, canids usually use smell since they have much better sense of smell than humans, birds have a bifurcated respiratory organ that allow them to sing whether the air is coming in or out (we humans speak by exhaling air). Some animals communicate with colours that humans cannot see. Bees communicate with movement, "dancing" and vibrating in specific ways.

Since we are barely able to understand human communication in all its variety, understanding the ways other animals communicate is still very hard.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: In code, what's the difference between x.f() and f(x)?
Author: PD28Cat
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rza6d/eli5_in_code_whats_the_difference_between_xf_and/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by berael: >x.f()

"The object X has a function inside of it named f().  Go start that function."

>f(x)

"I have a function named f(), and it needs a target.  Start that function, and use the object X as the target."
  Comment by KillerOfSouls665: Depends on the language, but in python, which your syntax matches, x.f() implies that x is a class and f() is a method of the class. f(x) says a global function f takes x as an input.

f could change dependent on the class of x. So this is why the distinction is made.
  Comment by Sufficient-Sink-8569: x.f(): This is typically used in object-oriented programming. Here, x is an object and f is a method or function that belongs to the object x. When you call x.f(), you’re calling the method f on the object x.  
  
f(x): This is a more traditional function call. f is a function and x is the input to that function. When you call f(x), you’re passing x as an argument to the function f.  
  
So, the main difference is that x.f() is used when f is a method of the object x, and f(x) is used when f is a function that takes x as an argument.
  Comment by Gaeel: First off, it will depend on the language, there may be languages where there are real differences between these two. For instance, in a language with encapsulation, `x.f()` will have access to the private members of `x` whereas `f(x)` will only be able to access the public interface of `x`.   
   
That said, there is a semantic difference between the two. Even in a language where there's no technical difference, you might prefer one or the other depending on what you're doing.   
   
`f(x)` implies that `f` is separate from `x`, and simply operates on `x`.   
`x.f()` implies that `f` is core to how `x` works.   
   
So for instance, I might make a geometry library that provides a `Vector3d` class.   
`Vector3d.Normalize()` is part of the core functionality of such a class, so I define it as a method with the `x.f()` syntax.   
`DrawVector(Vector3d)` wouldn't be part of the geometry library, it's part of some graphics module, but it operates on `Vector3d`, so I define it as a function with the `f(x)` syntax.
  Comment by DeHackEd: These are object oriented programming languages, and object-oriented programming in general.

The main difference between x.f() and f(x) is that you don't know what the `f` function is for sure in the first case. `x` is an object of a specific type, and you might not know exactly what type. This is what is known as polymorphism in programming. You might think `x` is a "person" type, but it is actually a more specific, "employee" type. Employees have more access to details of the rest of the program, and the `f` function was modified to reflect that for employees specifically.

At this point in writing code, you don't know that, but also you don't need to. That's the idea. The language takes care of checking the type of `x` and finding the right function to call.

Even in non-OOP languages, like C, you can make variables that point to functions, and simulate some of the OOP behaviours. In this case you would have to write it as `x.f(x)` because the language doesn't include a "this" object (C++), or automatically put it as the first parameter (Python, commonly called "self" instead), but get similar results.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: how are the "dragon teeth" pyramid fortifications different from Czech hedgehogs?
Author: Dacadey
Score: 3
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rz3d2/eli5_how_are_the_dragon_teeth_pyramid/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by AlchemicalDuckk: They're both intended to do the same thing, make an impassable barrier for armored vehicles by upending them or getting the tracks off the ground. The only differences are:

* Dragon's teeth are typically concrete while hedgehogs are steel. 

* Hedgehogs can move or be flipped over but still retain effectiveness.
  Comment by Pocok5: > Hedgehogs can move or be flipped over but still retain effectiveness.

*Proper* dragon's teeth are [anchored to large concrete bases](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hoeckerlinie_am_Panzerwerk_717.JPG) in the ground as well. It's not that they lose effectiveness just by moving, it's that they can't be moved without explosives or construction equipment and considerable time.

Now, the dragon's aliexpress dental fillings that were hastily placed by Russians a while ago, those can apparently be just pushed out of the way with a dozer blade equipped tank. The bigger problem there is the shitton of AT mines also in the area.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: Eli5: What is "Dead Internet Theory"?
Author: RoadmenInc
Score: 651
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18ryqr3/eli5_what_is_dead_internet_theory/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by berael: The idea is:  "The entire internet is all bots talking to each other.  There are no people on the internet.  You are here all alone, being besieged by bots while thinking that you're surrounded by people."
  Comment by zeiandren: It’s the idea a majority of internet content is bots in some way. For a bunch of subreddits and much of Twitter and Facebook it SEEMS true, not activity outnumbers real user interaction.

it goes from plausible to conspiracy theory when people talk about the majority being bots to literally every post and every aspect of the post, where it’s more of a trueman show type nonsense than the observation most Facebook comments seem generated by fake users
  Comment by rahga: The internet used to be a place where people like me would share information freely, even paying to host our own websites to do out little part to improve the world.

Business executives did not understand this. It didn't make a profit. Even if you could put advertisements on newspaper websites, why would people go there when others were so willing to host useful information for free?

Google's page rank system capitalized on the old internet by figuring out how many websites had linked to other websites. More links = more quality = higher rank.

The old internet started to suffer as more people got online. Social media took away all the technical hassles of connecting to each other and posting an online presence. Stupid people were casually linked to other stupid people, crowding out quality content. Costs went up, SEO ruined search engines, and the internet is now larger than ever but also more useless than ever. Any search for quality information sends you to countless paywalls because Google doesn't care about anything but selling ads. The internet is now - at best - a communication tool, and hardly a tool for gathering quality information.
  Comment by RelaxedBurrito: Are there  currently any statistics on the bot to human ratio on the Internet, or perhaps specific platforms? What is the current bot to human post radio on Reddit, Facebook, and Instagram for example?
  Comment by JimmyThePete: It’s based on the idea that there are a lot of bots auto-generating content and comments on the internet.  Once people become aware of how many bots are out there, they will quit engaging with online content because they can’t discern whether it’s real or bot generated content.  This results in an internet that’s just bots generating content for other bots to comment on. 

Where it spins off into conspiracy territory is that the bots were deliberately created to generate mounds of content to keep people passively clicking on posts and checking their phones to keep people phone addicted and generating money for the bot creators.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: eli5: How does evaporation work as opposed to boiling water?
Author: Comrade_Brib
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rxq6l/eli5_how_does_evaporation_work_as_opposed_to/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by KillerOfSouls665: Temperature is a measure of the average kinetic energy of the particles. So even ice can have a few particles with enough energy to break free, but very very few will. As temperature rises, the average energy increases, meaning a greater amount have the high energy to break free. The boiling point is simply the temperature when the particles must become free, every particle gains enough energy.
  Comment by Target880: A liquid boils when evaporation can create a gas pressure equal to the atmospheric pressure. That means any minuscule gas bubble created in the liquid can grow in size and then rise to the surface and escape.

Water evaporates at all temperatures the rate increases at increase at higher temperatures. Technically it needs to be a liquid to evaporate, when it freezes to ice the process to change directly to a gas is called sublimation.  

Vapor is water as a gas where the temperature is low enough to liquefy it by increasing the pressure and keeping the temperature constant. It is invisible and often a misused therme. If you for example vape the visible white stuff you see it not a vapour but an aerosol, small liquid droplets in the air that it visible. There is vapour there too but you can't see it. I will just call vapor a gas.


Water also condensates to a liquid at all temperatures, the higher the temperature the lower the right. Once again technically only when it can remain liquid because gas directly to solid is called deposition.

The rate of those processes results in the pressure of the gas water produced depending on the temperature. This pressure is called vapor pressure. Put water into a container where it was vacuumed and measure the pressure above it and you get this pressure, heat up the water, and the pressure increases. At 100C the pressure is 1 atmosphere, which is not a coincidence

This means you can change the temperature or the pressure to get water to boil. In a vacuum chamber water boils at room temperature. Energy is required to turn water from a liquid to a gas so the remaining water cools down. The process continues if you pump out the gas until the remaining water has cooled down enough to turn to ice.   This also happens at high altitudes on Earth, at 1600m where Denver is located water boils at 95C.


If you instead increase the pressure the boiling temperature increases, This is the idea of a pressure cooker. If you increase the pressure to 2 atmospheres water boil at about 120C and you can boil food faster.

Technically it is the pressure in the liquid that is relevant, that is the pressure of the atmosphere and the pressure the water above it creates. It is just a very small effect in a pot so you can ignore it. You need to go to 10 meters depth to get a pressure increase by 1 atmosphere. 




So water evaporates at all temperature as long as it is a liquid and also turns back to a liquid all the time. It boils when the pressure of this turning to a gas and turning to a liquid is high enough to let a bubble grow in the liquid, that pressure is the atmospheric pressure.
  Comment by TorakMcLaren: A slightly over-simplified explanation is that evaporation happens on the surface, but boiling happens throughout.

Temperature is just a measure of the average speed of all the stuff in a liquid.  I always like to think of it as being like a room full of young kids.  When it's a low temperature, they're all sitting nicely.  When the temperature rises, they get fidgety and start to move around the room a bit.  When the temperature is really high, that's like when they're all dosed up on sugar and bouncing off walls, tables, etc.

Except the whole group aren't exactly the same.  If one of the kids in the middle of the group happens to get a bit restless, they can't really go anywhere.  They just start to pester their neighbours but that's it.  On the other hand, if a kid at the side of the group gets restless, they can just stand up and wander off.  Evaporation is just when the kids at the edge of the group randomly walk off.  Even if the rest of the group is pretty calm, it just takes one near the edge to get bored for that to happen.

Meanwhile, boiling is when they all get so hyped up that one or two of the kids in the middle just can't take it any more and shove their way through the crowd.  As they go, others join in, and the whole activity descends into chaos until nobody is listening at all.
  Comment by Target880: There is a fundamental problem with that explanation, water boils in a vacuum chamber at room temperature. An explanation that just talks about enough energy for each molecule can't explain why the air pressure above has any effect on boiling.

The energy required to change the water to gas at 20C is slightly higher compared to what is required at 100C. That makes the average energy explanation even worse. The required energy will be taken from the surrounding water that cools down. The boiling will stop when the remaining water has cooled down enough and becomes ice.

The energy to turn water into a gas is there, it is a question of the rate it happens versus the rate it condensates back to a liquid. When that pressure is created is enough to form bubbles in the liquid it will boil.
  Comment by KillerOfSouls665: Low air pressure reduces the energy required for the particles to become gas, but you are right, it isn't a perfect explanation.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: Eli5 what is schizotypal disorder?
Author: New-Trainer-3499
Score: 3
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rxpky/eli5_what_is_schizotypal_disorder/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Q8DD33C7J8: Schizotypal is almost like introvert on steroids. They have no interest in anything to do with others. Sex, friendship, community, groups don't interest them. They prefer solitude over being with others. Superstition and eccentric ideas are common.
  Comment by BrStFr: I think you are confusing schizoid personality (which is characterized by detachment and lack of interest in social connections) with schizotypal personality, which involves odd thoughts, beliefs and behaviors.
  Comment by Q8DD33C7J8: Crap sorry they sound so similar. My mistake
  Comment by BrStFr: They are indeed easily confusable words.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: time, light, telescopes
Author: Awkward2580
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rxomc/eli5_time_light_telescopes/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Loki-L: That is a lot of different questions.

Light as far as we understand is made up out of photons which are sort of both particles and waves depending on how you look at them.

We don't actually know how our galaxy looks like, because we are in it and can't see all of it from here, but we can see other galaxies and based of what we can see of ours we can guess what it looks like.
  Comment by Sufficient-Sink-8569: Light is a form of electromagnetic radiation that can be detected by the human eye. It occurs over an extremely wide range of wavelengths, from gamma rays with wavelengths less than about 1 × 10 −11 metres to radio waves measured in metres. The wavelengths visible to humans occupy a very narrow band, from about 700 nanometres (nm; billionths of a metre) for red light down to about 400 nm for violet light1. Light produces photons which are small packets of energy. As the atoms of an object are heated, it results in the production of photons.  
  
Light or physical things? When we look through a telescope, we see the light that has been gathered and focused by the telescope. This light comes from distant objects in the universe, such as stars, galaxies, and planets. The telescope gathers this light and focuses it so that we can see these objects more clearly.  
  
We infer the shape of our galaxy by looking outward into space – toward tens of billions of other galaxies. Our universe makes galaxies only in a few basic models. The most common are spiral or disk-shaped galaxies – and we believe our galaxy is one of these. Gazing skyward from our vantage point on and around Earth, there are clear signs that the Milky Way is a spiral galaxy.  
  
Scientists have discovered evidence of the Big Bang by looking at the pattern of movement of distant galaxies and stars and by detecting the Cosmic Microwave Background. Additionally, the theory of cosmic inflation and the existence of gravitational waves support the Big Bang Theory.
  Comment by KillerOfSouls665: Light is a wave*. It is a wave in the magnet field and the electric field all around us, even in space. Light is formed by atoms releasing some stored energy. Light travels at a fixed speed, 300,000,000m/s. This is like how if you throw a stone in a lake, the waves move at a fixed speed.

Light having a speed limit means that what you are seeing is actually happening in the past. For most cases, light is so fast you can consider it to be instant. For example, when lightning strikes, the light is one million times faster than the sound. So you experience it much sooner.

However when you look at the moon, it is 384,000km away, meaning it takes just over a second for the light reflecting of the moon to reach you. The sun is even further, at 150,000,000km, it takes 8 minutes to reach earth. This surprisingly means that if the sun suddenly disappeared. We wouldn't know for 8 minutes. (Gravity also acts at the speed of light)

We do not know what are galaxy looks like from away, we can only guess based upon our measurements and looking at other galaxies. However in a very dark area with no clouds, you can see our galaxy fill the nights sky. It looks like someone spilled milk over half the sky, giving the name Milky Way.

The light produced from the black hole was made 14 billion years ago, and so if we look 14 billion light years away, we can see directly the aftermath of the big bang. This is because we are looking into the past every time we see something.

*For all your questions we can consider light to be a wave, in some situations it behaves like a particle.
  Comment by Ewok-Assasin: Our star like all stars emits photons that travel in all directions at the speed of light. We see the photons from our star about 8 min. after it leaves the sun. When you look up the sky at night and see a star. That is because a photon that came from that star travelled all the way to earth and interacted with your eyeball. Depending on how far away the star is those photons could have taken hundreds or thousands of years to get here.
  Comment by kevleyski: You are not alone in not getting it. Visible light is simply what we perceive as light due to the wavelength of elctromagnetic radiation and how it’s absorbed by some materials and reflected by others. Mean while heat is infra red and that weird glowing is UV and they all travel at the same rate, it’s a great puzzle to go investigate, good luck (basically no one knows for sure)

--------------------------------------------------

Title: Eli5: How do traffic lights work?
Author: mr_random_41
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rxhql/eli5_how_do_traffic_lights_work/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by KillerOfSouls665: It used to be that it was fixed timers in a cycle. Within the cycle there are points where it will check for pedestrians wanting to cross, and add time for pedestrians to cross. 

However, newer lights, (at least in the UK) have sensors to see if a pedestrian is on the road and extend the timer. They also have metal coils under the road, one immediately Infront of the light and one thurther back. You will see a square bit of sealant when they're there. 

These coils detect the change in impedance due to the large amount of metal above them. The lights can then use them to decide to change the order of the lights, or extend the time reds and greens are on.
  Comment by Gargomon251: I was always under the presumption that at least some intersections use pressure sensors (even a motorcycle weights significantly more than a single person)
  Comment by Quixotixtoo: The detector loops you describe can actually detect fairly small amounts of metal. Even 30 years ago, I could reliably trigger them with a bicycle -- although I'm sure the sensitivity can be adjusted.
  Comment by KillerOfSouls665: Not that I am aware of in the UK.
  Comment by Quixotixtoo: Thirty years ago, I would occasionally see an old pressure sensor for a traffic light in Seattle. It would be a rectangle of rubber in the road surface. They were about 3/4 the with of the traffic lane, and maybe 1 foot (1/3 m) long in the direction of the traffic flow. I haven't seen one in years, and even a quick google search didn't turn up a view of one.

Newer pressure sensors are used to get an approximate weight for trucks at "weigh in motion" locations. But I'm not aware of these being used for traffic light control.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: what is counting card in card games, why is it illegal and how can it be proven?
Author: TheStarBlueRaven
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rx4xj/eli5_what_is_counting_card_in_card_games_why_is/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by KillerOfSouls665: Card counting is legal in every country. Supreme court cases in the US have upheld it's legality. 

Imagine going to a chess tournament, but it is illegal to think too hard about your move. This is what it would be like if card counting was illegal.  All card counting is using a strategy, and a bit of hard thinking. 

However, because it turns the few % margin of the house into a few % to the player, casinos don't want people employing the strategy. IE, they don't want their customers to think. So they push the idea that it is illegal. They can kick you out of a casino and ban you if they suspect you're card counting, but any private establishment can kick and ban you for any reason.

They catch you because they themselves count the cards, and if they see players who are on a table low betting, and then suddenly high betting when the count is high, it is highly suspicious. Card counters avoid this by having many people each on a table low betting. They then signal over someone who then high bets on the good table. The casino however can connect your signal to someone coming over. They then can ban you all. They are very good at this.
  Comment by KaptenNicco123: Card counting is usually in reference to blackjack, where it is the practice of keeping a running tally of "card values" in order to predict what the next card drawn will be. By card value, I don't mean the numerical value on the card, but rather how good each kind of card is for the player.

Card counting is not illegal, as long as you don't use any external devices to help you. As long as you count in your head, you're not breaking any laws. Of course, any business can throw you out for any reason, so just because it's legal doesn't mean the casinos will let you do it.

It can't really be *proven*, but it can be substantiated. Usually though, a casino will just throw you out if you play too well.
  Comment by teh_maxh: Card counting is a blackjack strategy in which you keep track of the cards that have already been played. Generally, high cards are good for players while low cards are good for the house. If you've already seen most of the face cards, you know you're less likely to win (and you should make low bets); if you haven't seen many, you're more likely to win (and you should increase your bets).

Casinos like to win most of the time. They're actually ok with most people who *try* to count cards, because most people are bad at it. If someone does start winning a lot, though, casino staff will politely tell them how *lucky* they've been and that they're invited to go be lucky *somewhere else*.
  Comment by Vadered: Card counting is what we call it when a player keeps track of the relative number of high cards left in the deck or shoe in a game of blackjack compared to the number of low cards, in an attempt to enter the game or alter betting patterns when the remaining cards are favorable.  There are a number of systems for doing this.  A very simple one is count each ten, jack, queen, or king dealt as -1, and each two, three, four, five, or six as +1.  When the count is high, that means there are proportionally more high cards in the deck, and that is an advantage to the player.

Card counting isn't illegal.  It will get you politely but firmly asked to leave the establishment, but it's not illegal (though using electronic devices to help you do it probably is).

As for how it's proven - it doesn't have to be.  Casinos can eject you just because.  What will get you SUSPECTED of card counting are things like varying your level of bet, hopping back and forth between tables (often an indicator that you have somebody working with you, signalling you when a table has a good count), or making seemingly bad strategic decisions that are actually good when the count is taken into... account.
  Comment by Antman013: Card counting is completely legal throughout the world.  It is also fairly easy to recognize by casino security staff, who know what to look for.

Casinos have no obligation to "take your bet", and so, when they discover a card counter, they simply ask them to leave the premises (trespass them).  They cannot seize any winnings, but they can bar you from entry to the casino floor.

&#x200B;

As for "what it is", it is simply a method of observation that assigns a point value to the various cards in a deck.  By keeping track of exposed cards, a player can have a very good idea of what cards remain that will be favourable (or not) to their situation, and alter their bets accordingly.

In Blackjack, for example, when "the count" is favourable to the player, larger wagers are put in play, hoping to cash bigger wins.  When it's unfavourable, the player bets smaller, minimizing losses.

This is also the easiest way for casinos to find a "counter", as well.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Why do we need cell towers and can‘t just use satellites all the time?
Author: adaredd
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rws87/eli5_why_do_we_need_cell_towers_and_cant_just_use/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Konseq: The fastest we can send and receive signals is lightspeed. Satellites are high up in space and signals travel significantly longer than a signal to the next cell tower that is just a mile or kilometer away. Also it is much cheaper to just put up a cell tower which is basically a router on a long pole (ELI5 level explanation) versus sending up rockets.

Another important reason is that satellite need to move constantly around the earth (those in low earth orbit) to not fall from the sky so you need several satellites to keep an area like a city covered with cell signal. 

If you use satellites in geo stationary orbit the satellites have to be even further away from earth's surface which would increase signal travel times even further.

Also if hardware on a cell tower breaks down or needs an upgrade you can just send out a technician with a van to go climb up to fix or replace it. With satellites this isn't possible so you would need to build the hardware error proof with redundant systems and future proof which makes everything a lot more expensive. For cell towers you can use much cheaper hardware because it is not such a big issue if something breaks.
  Comment by jefuchs: Short answer:  That little device in your pocket isn't powerful enough to communicate with a satellite in space.  But it can communicate with a nearby tower.
  Comment by stevestephson: On average, you're less than 20 miles away from the nearest cell tower. At best, you're over 15k miles from the nearest communications satellite. It's much easier to send a signal to that cell tower than the satellite. When you're out on the ocean, you essentially just need to deal with it, and ideally you have a large marine engine to power your device instead of a tiny cell phone battery. They make satellite cell phones, but they are beefier than the average non satellite cell phone, to accommodate the battery and more powerful antenna.
  Comment by LARRY_Xilo: Because satellites are much more expensive than cell towers and replacing the hardware on satellites is basicly impossible, replacing the hardware on a celltower is done easily, so you can upgrade the celltower every few years when new technology becomes available. Also satellites being father away means they have higher delay between sending and receving signals, this might not be a problem for most things you do but for some things it is at least annoying.
  Comment by agate_: Most of the answers here are missing the really big reason: band capacity.

It’s entirely possible to make a pocket phone that communicates with satellites in orbit, and the signal travel time to *low* earth orbit isn’t a problem.

And as for cost, as expensive as satellites are, surely a hundred satellites would be cheaper than the literally *[millions](https://dgtlinfra.com/top-100-cellular-towers-companies/)* of towers around the world?

And while we’re at it, why do cities have lots of cell towers, rather than one big huge one, like they did with TV towers?

And why are they called “cellular” phones anyway?

The answer: imagine we had one satellite flying over New York or Shanghai, or one big tower per city.  It would be responsible for *millions* of people trying to use their phones simultaneously.  Even if it had the processing power, all those phones would compete for limited radio frequency spectrum, and the more they have to share the airwaves, the less data each phone can send and receive.

Ever try to have a conversation in a crowded cocktail party?  Now imagine the whole city is in the same room.

So cell phone networks are divided into *cells*.  Each antenna on a tower talks to a few hundred phones in a small area, and the phones and towers communicate quietly enough that that same radio spectrum can also be used by other towers farther away.  So everyone only has to share the airwaves with the people in their neighborhood, not the entire city.  It’s like a hundred little cocktail parties rather than one big one.

And you can vary the size of the cells by putting more towers in densely populated areas, and fewer in the countryside.  Can’t do that with satellites!

The secret genius behind cell phones, and the answer to this ELI5, is right there in the name, which people use every day without thinking about it: they’re “cellular” phones.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: How come the time format is unified across the world, but date formats are not?
Author: AmazingSane
Score: 6
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rwrmc/eli5_how_come_the_time_format_is_unified_across/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by blipsman: Time format isn’t — some places use 12 hour format with AM / PM while others use 24 hour format
  Comment by not_today_trebeck: It has been with [ISO 8601](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601) but since the scientific community can't force governments to adopt it people just have to choose to use it. It really just makes sense though, longest period of time to shortest: year>month>day>hour>minute>second
  Comment by vrhotlaps: It's only Americans who have the date arse about face. The rest of the world uses dd/mm/yyyy
And loads of Americans can't wrap their heads around a 24 hour clock. They think its military time! Yeah, the rest of the world just calls it time.
  Comment by NewClock8197: It’s not. Many countries have no concept of what am/pm are but rather use the 24 hour clock
  Comment by Mammoth-Mud-9609: Because Americans messed it up, partly in the way the way they say the date, so is it the 3rd of April or April the 3rd?

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: How does a language spoken in a whole country change completely?
Author: Total_Tap_5720
Score: 11
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rw931/eli5_how_does_a_language_spoken_in_a_whole/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by MercurianAspirations: In addition to what the others said about gradual change, it's also worth noting that prior to modern education and printing, it simply wouldn't have been the whole country that changed. 

There's an anecdote from a book by a guy called William Caxton printed in 1490. To give an example of how language was changing in his day, he tells a story about how some merchants set sail for Holland, but stopped over in the region of Kent. They go to some locals to buy fresh provisions, and one of the merchants asks a woman for "egges". And the woman answers him that unfortunately she couldn't understand, for "she coude speke no frenshe". They argue back and forth about who is speaking English and who is speaking French until another local goes, "oh, don't you mean *eyren*? We have *eyren* of course." 

Whether the anecdote is actually true or not Caxton sees it as representative of a real phenomenon: English was changing so fast and so unevenly that people could disagree on the words for basic things between adjacent regions. 

And the place where this anecdote appears is kind of instructive in how English eventually became uniform. Caxton's point is that he, as a printer, can only choose one of these many different words. He has to make a choice about what to print in his books. Never before had this really been the case, but mass printing changed everything.
  Comment by Luckbot: It happens through slow changes that get adopted.

A teenager somewhere used the word "lit" for the first time some time in the last decade I guess. Now a whole generation uses the word. By random chance some social/generational/local variations becomes the new norm over time.

Since this happens all the time for centuries after a while the old language becomes hard to understand for modern people.

English is kinda a special case, because the island was conquered by foreign invaders several times and the new management basically forced the locals to use their language wich formed a new language from the mix of the old and the new one since not all words were accepted fully.
  Comment by turniphat: It should be noted the idea of a national language is pretty recent phenomenon, like in the last 100-200 years. It wasn't until rapid communication and transportation that everybody in a country would be able to speak to each other. In 1914, 50% of French people still spoke a regional language instead of the national language. In Italy, Mussolini forced all schools and governments to speak 'standard' Italian. Even though everybody in China speaks Chinese, lots of can not speak to each other. Swiss German is unintelligible to speakers of Standard German. 

The whole language changes once the government has the power and technology to male everybody speak the same way.
  Comment by atgrey24: Part of the reason English spelling and pronunciation is so screwy is because the printing press arrived at the same time English was in the midst of the massive shift you're talking about. So words were getting locked in while vowel sounds were changing. Other European languages were more set by then, so it was as dramatic.

On top of that, many printers with Flemish and didn't have the appropriate letters for English. So they had to replace the Þ with "th" for example. And because they were used to different spelling rules, they made  different choices.

This is how you wind up with dough, through, and rough all being spelled the same and pronounced differently.

There's a fantastic [99PI episode ](https://99percentinvisible.org/episode/corpse-corps-horse-and-worse/) about it, titled 
"Corpse, Corps, Horse and Worse".
  Comment by PearlsJustWan2HavFun: I once heard someone refer to English as “a shady language that lurks in dark alleyways waiting to mug other languages and rifle through their pockets looking for loose words.”

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: how do countries pay off their war debts?
Author: urmomsloosevag
Score: 7
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rw0yu/eli5_how_do_countries_pay_off_their_war_debts/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by phiwong: It is more or less like any other debt, except the amount etc is determined by the agreement rather than a loan. Each country that had some claim (victim of German aggression in WW2) puts in a series of requests and negotiate it with the new German government as to how that claim is to be paid. A lot of that reparation (which is the correct term) was not paid in cash. Payments included land, equipment, resources (coal mines etc), intellectual property, some rights (US gets land and permission for their army bases in Germany) and some money. 

Of course this is specific to WW2. Afterwards Germany collects taxes etc and pays of the remaining.
  Comment by KaptenNicco123: It depends what you mean by war debts. If you mean war reparations, they're paid as any other international debt repayment. In the 1920s, Germany sent literal paper Marks to France to pay those indemnities. If you mean "debt incurred by a government in order to finance a war", that's repaid just the same as any other government debt.
  Comment by Mammoth-Mud-9609: People buy "war bonds" from the government a certificate they get for loaning the government money, eventually the government buys back the bonds.
  Comment by majdavlk: war debts are paid according to the agreement made when signing peace. you can google who germany pays to.

&#x200B;

1 thing to keep in mind, many states just claim to be the said state without having any justification to claim so. todays germany is in no way the third reich, as that was conquered and new government without continuation to the previous one was estabilished. compared to soviet onion and russia, or prussia and the previous version of germany, which transitioned accordign to the will of its rulers, and most institutions have remained intact
  Comment by nim_opet: The same as any other debts, these days by bank transfers , previously by transferring actual currency or even before precious metals, goods, land etc

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: What exactly makes some singing “good” vs. “bad”? How can you tell if something is on or off pitch?
Author: Striking-Ad-8688
Score: 6
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rw009/eli5_what_exactly_makes_some_singing_good_vs_bad/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Fby54: A lot of things go into the quality of the voice, however pitch is easy to quantify. There are two things that make a song unique, the order that notes are in, and the length of time that each note is maintained. By mixing these two you can make music. Marry had a little lamb and twinkle twinkle little star both use the same notes, but the order of the notes is different which makes them distinguishable and recognizable. You can tell someone is off pitch when singing along to a song or sining a song you know by using your pattern recognition to see if the notes sound the same as your reference. Now if someone is just singing one solid note, it takes a fair amount of practice to be able to tell what pitch they are singing, it took me a solid 2 years of practice about every day to get it.
  Comment by mattrhale: Telling if a singer is sharp (too high) or flat (too low) is a simple matter of experience. However, some people who are considered "tone deaf" cannot figure it out. Other people with a natural musicality don't even need experience, they just hear it and can tell. I am confident that anyone can be trained to critically listen to music and spot the difference.

That being said, it is not possible for just anyone to reproduce those notes accurately with their voice. This is because everyone's larynx and their ability to control it differ massively. They may be an excellent critical listener and able to accurately identify specific notes that are being played. These people are known as having "perfect pitch/tone". However, it is important to separate people who can identify a note as a C or D sharp or whatever, and people who can accurately reproduce a note they hear without knowing what note it is. Those people also have perfect tone/pitch, but no musical training. Classically trained musicians would only say a person has perfect tone if they can identify the note accurately. Elitist scum.

Some professional singers have really bad larynx control, but still have a voice worth listening to. A good example is Dido. 

Some pro singers have it all. Tone, larynx control, power... Hayley Williams from Paramore is one of those.
  Comment by Rugrin: Good singing is singing that I like and feels good to me to listen to. Bad singing is singing the upsets me, makes me angry and I do not enjoy. 

It doesn’t matter a whit to me if the singer is in key or pitch or whatever. If I like it and it touches me, it is good to great. 

All else is not good singing to me. 

And this is true for everyone. Music nerds and gate keepers sweat the labels. Just listen to what you like and find people that like what you make.
  Comment by Radekzalenka: I’m not a professional musicer but if it sounds bad then it’s bad?
  Comment by aDarkDarkNight: Being an art, judging whether something is 'good' or 'bad' is entirely subjective. This is true for paintings, novels, statues, drama, any art. So given this, how do we decide what is 'good'? In the visual arts it's decided by a panel of experts, for example, if something is good, or even a masterpiece. Interestingly most of us who are not experts think that these so-called masterpieces could have been done by a visually impaired 5 year old having a tantrum while holding a paint brush.

It's no different in music, except for pop music the panel of experts is considered to be the public, so the tools most used to judge if a song is good or bad would be something like number of streams, or in the old days, record sales. This system is of course fraught with peril but as I say, being an art there is no 'real' way to judge.

In terms of on or off pitch, music, being sound, is created by vibrations, the speed of which can be measured. If something is off pitch, or out of tune, the number of vibrations won't match causing a kind of oscillating sound which is caused by the difference in the 2 sets of vibrations - the one that's 'in-tune' and the one that is 'out of tune'. Most people can hear this as they are used to hearing 'in-tune' however not everyone can (see 'tone deaf')

There are exceptions and cultural aspects to this, but that's the basics of it.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: How does traffic switch the driving side when you cross the border into a country driving on the other side of the road? (Like Sweden before 1967)
Author: ChocolatemilkThief
Score: 59
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rvwi6/eli5_how_does_traffic_switch_the_driving_side/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by VegetarianReaper: Well, there are several ways to do it.

You can have a structure that forces you to switch sides on the road, like the Lotus Bridge linking China and Macau.

You can also have a vessel that parks in a particular way that forces you onto the other side of the road, like cross-Channel ferries.

... as mentioned by both previous comments.

But most often you'll just get a traffic light with a switch sides sign on it.
  Comment by drmanhattanmar: For example: between China and Macao there is a bridge shaped like a Bretzel, which leads the drivers to the other side without any mishaps.

https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lotus-bridge-macau.jpg
  Comment by saschaleib: When you arrive via ferry to the UK from Europe mainland, the traffic is directed in a way that you will end up on the left lane. You just continue driving there (watch out for some truck driver who didn’t get the idea of left-hand traffic yet and almost rams you at the first crossroad…
  Comment by dudewiththebling: During Dagen H, or Day H for us English speakers, they basically stopped all non-essential traffic between 1AM and 6AM (in some places longer), then at 4:50AM they needed to carefully change to the right side of the road and then stop. During this time, road crews reconfigured intersections.

In short, it was a dance that required lots of coordination
  Comment by Nulovka: In Africa, where it happens a lot, you have to pull into a parking lot for immigration and customs using one lane, park, do your thing, then exit the car park on the other side using the opposite lane you came in on. Lots of signs. So I've been told.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: How do you solve the n queen problem?
Author: Plus-Boot9923
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rvku4/eli5_how_do_you_solve_the_n_queen_problem/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by t4pf: I’ve always seen it solved by writing a program.

Label the board with coordinates going from (0, 0) to (7, 7). Place the first queen at (0, 0). Place the second queen at the first coordinate such that she isn’t attaching the first queen—that would be (1, 2). Place the third queen at the first coordinate such that she isn’t attacking the first or second queens. Continue till all queens are placed. 

If it isn’t possible to place a queen, move the last queen you placed to her next safe coordinate, and continue. This will find all solutions, albeit slowly. 

You’ll find working (and optimised) C programs online.
  Comment by mikeholczer: If I remember correctly, there are something like 50 solutions for 8 queens, but I forget if that’s including rotations of the board or not. 

For 8 kings there would be many more. You could also place more than 8 kings on the board without them being able to capture each other.
  Comment by purple_pixie: This is called [depth first search](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Depth-first_search), OP, if you want somewhere to start looking for more info

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: What's the difference between NFC and RFID?
Author: LoLusta
Score: 3
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18ruvqj/eli5_whats_the_difference_between_nfc_and_rfid/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Gnonthgol: You are right that there are lots of overlap and not really good definitions of either. But it is safe to say that RFID is NFC but not all NFC is RFID. The concept behind RFID is that you have a very dumb device that when energised by a nearby reader will just broadcast its identification number. This is very similar to a barcode although some of these can store a bit of information similar to a magnetic strip. NFC does include this RFID but also include standards where two smart devices are communicating with each other. This allows for more dynamic information to be transmitted and a lot more information. For example a credit card communicating with the bank terminal is not just simple RFID because there is a computer inside the credit card that records and signs the transaction for the terminal. And two cell phones can transfer files over NFC, or at least enough information to pair their bluetooth to each other temporarily to transfer the files over this.
  Comment by tbone338: NFC: two devices communicate with each other and can send data. Like Apple Pay or Google pay. NFC does not send the same fixed data every time.

RFID: one device, like a badge, broadcasts a fixed identifier every time when it’s energized by another device.
  Comment by randomjapaneselearn: NFC is the name of the technology: near field communication

RFID is a sub-set of devices that uses NFC to communicate a simple ID via radio (RF)

there are more complex devices that can exchange informations bidirectionally, store data, perform crypto ooperations...
  Comment by silverbolt2000: From Wikipedia (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Near-field_communication?wprov=sfti1#), NFC is a specific implementation of RFID.

In other words, RFID is the underlying generic technology and NFC is one specific communications standard that uses it.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: Eli5: how do the Planet Earth folks capture such incredible moments on camera?
Author: Thin-Success-3361
Score: 829
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rtvpp/eli5_how_do_the_planet_earth_folks_capture_such/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Jarcooler: You should watch the behind the scenes mini documentaries at the end of the episodes or on YouTube. How they film varies a lot depending on what they're filming. For most shoots about bigger wild animals such as Polar Bears for example, it's hundreds of hours of waiting around in areas they think the bears will be, filming a great deal of footage then editing this into the version you see. Some shoots involve setting up motion triggered cameras and gathering footage for months, some shots are from drones or helicopters with very long range camera rigs, underwater filming uses a lot of different techniques.   

Most of the insect footage you see is effectively staged, it would be almost impossible to achieve some of the detailed shots of insect behaviours in the wild so they'll often have a natural looking set with a camera rig set up focused on the subject.
  Comment by NorCalAthlete: Had a friend of a friend who got some of his footage into a similar series for National Geographic. 

It involved him camping out in the middle of nowhere with basically no human contact, showers, or anything else for 6+ months. 

The strategy was to become part of the landscape until the animals were no longer scared / wary of the “new” thing and they just treated him like any other tree / bush / animal there for water or whatever. 

He got some incredible footage but personally I don’t think I could do that.
  Comment by The_RealKeyserSoze: A lot of it is just luck and time. You can look up some of the BTS footage from the first our planet and planet earth II, they send out different teams to cover each segment and they might spend weeks or months trying to capture what is ultimately just a few minutes on screen. Some of that process can be automated, for example the snow leopard shots in planet earth II involved camera traps and months of waiting. What you don’t see is the time they spend siting around not filming anything, waiting for something to happen.
  Comment by adrianinked: Some are the results of an extraordinary amount of patience with long range lenses, some are all staged and/or different animals from different moments edited as a cohesive narrative...

I am 99% sure that iguana running from killer snakes was placed in the middle of that snake hell by a human.
  Comment by Pjoernrachzarck: /u/jarcooler gave a good response, I would add a somewhat more cynical take. The content you see in nature documentaries is a lot less ‘real’ than most people think.

Yes, a great deal of it involves expensive equipment and dedicated nature photographers with infinite patience and resources staking out remote locations for weeks and months to get certain shots.

But likewise, assume that most everything that can be staged, or encouraged to happen, will be. It’s not illegal (and depending on who you ask, not unethical) to recreate something you know happens naturally; or to coerce animals to interact in some way; or to recreate an outside place in an inside studio for the missing bits in your narrative. The narratives in these documentaries are nearly all ‘fake’ to some degree and created in editing, narration, sound design (almost everything you *hear* in these documentaries is artificually mixed/created) and sometimes VFX. Sometimes, a photography crew manages to capture one incredibly situation/shot - and then you have to create a narrative around it.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: Eli5: when you close a long term loan with a super low interest rate (3%) and a few years later the market is lending at 8-9.5%, is the bank that made the loan losing money on your loan and loans like it. My mind says no but I’d like to know more about why not, if not.
Author: zombieonejesus
Score: 344
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rss7q/eli5_when_you_close_a_long_term_loan_with_a_super/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Red_AtNight: They aren’t losing money. It’s still a productive asset on their balance sheet - they are receiving loan payments from you.

However what they are losing is *opportunity.* The funds they tied up lending you money at 3%, they cannot use to lend someone else money at 9%.

That’s generally why the bank gives you a better rate for a shorter term loan. For long term loans they have to price in uncertainty about where rates are going
  Comment by yalloc: I wouldn’t call it losing money but it can raise complications.

I’ll just use the bank collapses earlier this year as an example. So banks as you know are in the business of loaning out money, they take customer deposits and make money on them by giving out loans on which they collect interest, as an incentive to bank with them sometimes they share that interest with you. 

What happened earlier this year with banks like First Republic which collapsed is during the pandemic they put much of their money into safe low interest long term bonds, earning them some 1% yield or whatever per year. But now that money is locked up, they can’t recall that loan whenever they want, they don’t have the money from it until that loan matures. If everyone goes to the bank and asks for their money back (what we call a bank run), they just don’t have it yet, even though they will in the future.

To resolve this we have the debt market. Loans can be bought and sold to resolve this, while the bank doesn’t have the money from the loan now it can sell that loan now for a small premium. The problem is the premium for this loan is set by the market which is set/sets interest rates.


When the bank goes to sell its say 100 dollar loan for 10 years at 3%, other banks that are prospective buyers go all “wait a minute, I can loan 100 out now for 7%, you’re going to have to cheapen the loan to make it worth it.” It turns out that if you do the math, you can convert this 100 dollar loan at 3% to a 68 dollar loan at 7%, and this is what this other bank would be willing to pay for it.

This led to the collapse of First Republic. Made worse by the fact that when people found out about this, they took more money out, worried the bank would collapse and they wouldn’t get it back. 

So yes, there are money losing scenarios.
  Comment by HackPhilosopher: OP a majority of these answers are simply wrong if answered inside the USA. There are a couple of different types of mortgages but we will stick with conventional loans instead of FHA, VA or others that are issued by the government. 

 The banks do not hold on to these assets for the vast majority of home loans sold in the United States. So the answer to your question is no. The vast majority of banks aren’t losing money because rates were so low 2 years ago. The only ones losing money were banks that for whatever reason did not or could not sell their conventional loans to Fanny or Freddie because of mistakes made in the origination. And they are losing money in the sense they may be making 2% per year simple interest on a loan and they may be paying out 4% in interest on money in their savings accounts. And that their money is tied up in a really cheap 30 year loan that could be spending today to generate a higher return. 

As soon as a conventional mortgage is originated and funded it is sent to a team in the bank to have it purchased by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac. When originating the loan there are underwriting guidelines that dictate who will buy it. The loan is worth a little bit more if it meets both of their guidelines but that is another story altogether. These two quasi government controlled private entities enable banks to be able to make more loans because it is purchased almost immediately after its origination. That keeps the wheels of commerce moving so more people can buy houses. 

Fannie and Freddie own something ridiculous like 9 trillion in mortgage debt. If that puts things into perspective. 

What Fannie and Freddie then typically do is pay a 3rd party to service the loan to hopefully keep Americans from defaulting on their loans. The servicer usually doesn’t get paid if the loan is behind or in default so it incentivizes the servicer to keep your loan active and being paid. 

New loans post 2008 meltdown are back to being considered safe investments due to how strict underwriting guidelines are for these 2 companies and for the fact they they have their servicing standards that need to be met. So what Fannie and Freddie do next is take that mortgage and bundle it up with 100s of other loans and that creates a mortgage backed security that they can sell and also find more liquidity to buy more loans from banks and so on. This is partly why interest rates go up and down every day even when rates don’t change from the fed every day. The securities need to be attractive to investors and if it doesn’t outperform the safest investments like t-bills, then there is no point in buying them since they could just put their money in basically guaranteed returns. The originator sets the rate competitively enough that it can make it look attractive to both the future homeowner and the future investor. Obviously those two parties want opposite things so they have to walk a tightrope when setting rates. Staying competitive in the market while also keeping in mind that it needs to be purchased later and used as an attractive investment.
  Comment by Wilco062: The bank isn't exactly losing money on your 3% loan when the market rate is higher; it's just not making as much as it could be if it were lending at current higher rates. They still make the expected profit from the agreed-upon rate when they gave you the loan, but the opportunity to make more is reduced.
  Comment by Yet_Another_Limey: No, the bank “hedged” that interest rate risk by having liabilities that they pay a fixed rate of interest on such that they are overall matched to a decent level. They will also have used “swaps” to change the profile between floating and fixed rates of interest to match their risk tolerance.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: What is a child learning by playing with Bead Mazes?
Author: Fanatic_Of_Racin
Score: 182
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rss0t/eli5_what_is_a_child_learning_by_playing_with/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by GingersaurusRex: It's more of a fidget toy than an educational one, but I would say the developmental outcomes are

1. Fine motor skills

2.  Learning how to predict outcomes (these beads are on the red wire.  If I continue to push them they will go through the loop, and end on the red wire on the other side.) Or (the blue wire goes up and down in a zig zag.  There is no way for me to move the beads on the blue wire to a wire with a different pattern)

3.  Gravity (if you let go of the beads, they will fall to the lowest point)

4.  Numbers, counting, basic math (there are 8 beads on this wire.  I can move them one at a time and count " 1, 2, 3, 4...") Or (I can move two at a time and it only takes 4 times to move all the beads from one side to the other)

All of this is subconscious learning.  Kids don't even realize that making observations about the world is educational.
  Comment by None: [removed]
  Comment by None: [removed]
  Comment by Gurgoth: To add to some of the other comments.

When humans are born they basically know nothing.

Literally nothing.

Take a moment to realize how much you have to learn in order to function at a basic level. Their movement skills all need to be learned. Initially their hands are pretty chaotic with minimal finger control. It takes months before a baby can hold even a bottle.

Bead mazes are entertainment mostly but they enhance basic movement skills. There are many other lessons learned which have been mentioned in other comments. 

The important thing to realize is just how much babies don't know, don't understand, or can't do. We take for granted an amazing amount of skills and knowledge every day and rarely reflect on where it came from.
  Comment by Spatzdar:  Not sure how much learning is going on but it’s a good sensory experience and I’d assume helps develop moter skills and confidence to figure things out and a good amount of “hmm how does this work where is it going”

--------------------------------------------------

Title: Eli5 : Handling mass in zero gravity
Author: War-ear
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rs6uc/eli5_handling_mass_in_zero_gravity/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by mb34i: To give you an idea of what it feels like in zero gravity, go to a pier or a dock and push a boat away.  There's no gravity involved because it's aimed downward and the water buoyancy negates its effects, so when you push a boat sideways you're just dealing with the mass of it.  At low speeds, water doesn't cause a lot of friction, so the boat situation is as close as possible to zero g.

Pushing a bicycle forward would also work as an experiment, and you can load the bicycle with more and more weights to see the effect of mass.  

Basically, you're expending considerable effort to get the mass moving, and once it's moving it'll continue to move that way.
  Comment by goomunchkin: Short answer is yes, but the more massive the object the more you’re going to have to push to get it to move.

With no gravity and in a vacuum, any amount of force you apply to the object will get it to move, no matter how massive. It may be moving reeeeeaaaaaaaallllllyyy slowly, but it would be moving. 

EDIT: Fundamentally it’s this principal in action that is the basis behind the idea of [solar sails.](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solar_sail) The idea is that light gives the sail a suuuuuuper teeny weeny push but a push nonetheless. Keep pushing for long enough and you can have a spacecraft that approaches near light speed, even with the teeniest weeniest things doing the pushing. Like a bunch of ants shoving along the titanic.
  Comment by mazzicc: “Inertia” starts to be an important concept instead of just mass. “Inertia” is basically “resistance to motion”. But in space, that resistance can usually be overcome with enough time. 

You can push a 1000kg item, but maybe pushing for 1 min only gets it moving at 1mm/s. 

But it doesn’t stop moving after you pushed it. Then you can push for another minute, and it’s now moving at 2mm/s. 

Repeat long enough, and you can get it going as fast as you have time. 

There are limits, but that’s beyond an eli5
  Comment by Jake_The_Panda: For every reaction there is an equal and opposite reaction. So, if you push on a truck, that truck is also pushing on you. If you're 150lbs and the truck is 5000lbs, you exert the same force on each other. You will move away from the truck quickly, and the truck may ever so slightly move in the opposite direction, proportionally to your mass and the trucks mass.
  Comment by crujones43: I work in Nuclear power plants.  The turbines have unbelievably massive shafts/ rotors. some weigh more than 300,000lbs.  When doing maintenance we often have to rotate the rotor to different positions.  Instead of ball bearings, turbine rotors use what is called jacking oil. Oil gets pumped up underneath the shaft in the bearings at high pressures and it actually lifts and floats the shaft.  When the jacking oil is turned on it is pretty darn near frictionless and a single person can grab a blade and lean on it. it takes a second to start moving and starts very very slow but it will move from one person.  It takes the same force in the opposite direction to stop it.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: Eli5: Roth IRA accounts
Author: Overall-Ad8703
Score: 2
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rrn42/eli5_roth_ira_accounts/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by whey_dhey1026: You put money in post-tax (instead of pre) and when you cash it out, you don’t pay more taxes on the profits you made on what you put in. 

For this reason, there are contribution caps and other limitations on them. 

Contrast to an IRA or 401k—pre tax, so you pay taxes on the income you made when you cash it out. Less limitations on these.
  Comment by homeboi808: People don’t want to work till they die, they want to retire.  
  
To retire you need money, unless you just move in with your child and mooch off them. If you worked then you get Social Security checks, but they aren’t a lot.  
  
You can save money in a bank account, but interest isn’t typically that high.  
  
You can invest in real estate, but that’s more hands on (and can come it issues, my grandma owns a condo on Oahu but because they have special laws regarding land ownership she needs to pay ~80% of its value otherwise it gets taken away and she gets ~20%.) .  
  
You can invest in stocks in a normal account but it’s taxed a fair amount.  
  
An IRA is a “stock” account that is meant for retirement and the government taxes it less than a standard stock account. Since the government is giving this tax-break they impose limits on who qualifies. An IRA is in the same ballpark as a 401k except 401ks are offered thru your job whereas IRAs you setup yourself (it’s in the name: Individual Retirement Account).  
  
Traditional accounts you pay tax when you withdraw the money.  
Roth accounts you pay tax when you contribute the money.  
  
Which is better depends on your current/future income levels, tax credits you may qualify for, etc.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: how is clean water "clean" in wild
Author: IAmMagical142907
Score: 413
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rqwbh/eli5_how_is_clean_water_clean_in_wild/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by CheeseburgerBrown: What you’re thinking of as clean may be what we usually call potable, or drinkable water. This just means water that isn’t contaminated with high levels of salt, or algae, or other objectionable materials that will make you throw up, poo yourself, or die.

For instance, I have three natural springs on my property, one of which I tap into for my house. This water is potable. It is free enough from excessive levels of animal or plant life, or environmental toxins, that if I drink it I won’t shit myself or pass out. Success!

This doesn’t mean it’s “clean” like if you ran it through a filtering process. It’s from the water table underground, flowing through sand and rocks and pebbles and worm crap and beetle larvae and fungus empires.

But I wash my dishes in it and bathe in it and use it make Tang and still stay healthy.
  Comment by ledow: Humans and their ancestors were drinking flowing water for millions of years, and every animal on the planet that isn't in a zoo or a pet is still drinking "natural" water that's just sitting out.

Does it have bugs, bacteria, etc. in it?  Yep.  Definitely.

Could it make you ill?  Yep.  Possibly.

Is it instantaneous poison?  Highly unlikely.  In fact, humans probably make more deadly water on average than has ever existed anywhere on earth before.

But, yes, it can have parasites, worms, bacteria, poisons, etc. in it.  You're far safer drinking treated water, obviously.  But is it a guaranteed death sentence?  Almost certainly not or you wouldn't be here and nor would any of your ancestors.

Your body's immune system is fabulous, if you let it work.  It can cope with all kinds of things.  Same as that of countless billions of animals that are all drinking from the same waterhole that the buffalo are shitting in and the crocs are leaving bits of dead bodies in.

Would a sensible person avert that risk given the choice?  Yes.

If you're thirsty and days away from a perfectly clean source of water, should you drink it?  Yes.
  Comment by Bronze_Brown: I hike and camp in the mountains in South Africa. We drink water from mountain streams, and it’s so normal to do so that your question even shocked me “of course drinking from natural water sources is safe!” Then, I realised that due to being in this environment and having experience drinking from natural sources growing up, we actually have a lot of internalised knowledge and rules around what ‘safe’ water is and what ‘unsafe’ water is. You don’t drink water lower down the mountain. You don’t drink water that’s been sitting stagnant. You don’t drink water that flows near or through human settlements. You shouldn’t poop outdoors within 500 metres of a water source. You check with locals whether a given lake is safe to drink from. Interesting question on a topic I’ve taken for granted my whole life!
  Comment by oblivious_fireball: it depends on where the water has been and for how long. Water that falls as rain or snow is as pure as it gets in the wild, and once its on the ground it either runs off into nearby lakes and rivers, or it filters down through the soil into underground aquifers through many layers of rock, soil, and roots.

aquifers, being underground, typically are free of microbes that could be harmful, and usually most other contaminants have been filtered out by all the soil and rock above. These are usually drinkable without risk of health problems.

Rivers and lakes are a different story. The farther down from their origin, the more time for waste and microbes to accumulate in the water that could lead to illness, particularly with lakes as the water is more stagnant. Abundant plant life can remove some of the waste products and chemicals, but microbes stick around longer. Streams that are very close to where they started or emerge from underground, like a mountainside or cave are on the less risky side if you are in need of water and don't have the ability to make a fire to boil it.

this also *mostly* applies to drinking water. water to clean yourself or something you won't be eating with is a little less picky, and if you can boil your water, even moreso as microbes are the primary threat to your health.
  Comment by Moridin67: Generally as long as the water is moving it is safe(ish) to drink. Water trapped in 1 spot will warm up and breed bacteria like crazy. It will also start evaporating, so it condenses the badness even more. 

Any water you find randomly CAN be contaminated by bacteria, or pollution if it's near human settlements. Most of the time, the worst thing that will happen is you get diarrhea or vomiting from bacteria or something similar. Only certain things would outright kill you, and any time you wake up, maybe you die.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5 OS, Software, Hardware
Author: Original_Ad6105
Score: 2
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rqmq6/eli5_os_software_hardware/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by bigbubblegumballs: Think of the operating system like the conductor of an orchestra. It's a special software that manages and directs all the different parts of a computer, such as the memory, processor, and storage. The OS makes sure that other programs (like games or word processors) can use the computer's resources without interfering with each other. It also helps you interact with your computer by providing a user-friendly interface. So, while it is a kind of software, it's not like regular programs you use—it's more like the boss that helps everything work together smoothly.
  Comment by ArtisticPollution448: The operating system is a common, simple interface for software to interact with the hardware.

Your program wants to have access to some memory so it can create a variable. With no operating system, it would need to know what kind of memory the computer has, and what commands to send to that exact kind of memory, etc. And how can you be sure no other program will access or change your memory? 

The operating system provides a clean interface for your program to say "give me this much memory" and it just works. Same for sending a message over the internet, or reading data from a hard drive. 

The more you think about what they do the more impressive it is that they work at all. Like take any Windows or Linux computer, open it up and put in a new hard drive- and your program can read from it without any changes, typically.
  Comment by jh67zz: Hardware: Think of hardware as the physical components of a computer or any electronic device. This includes things you can touch, like the computer's processor (the brain of the computer), its memory (where it stores information temporarily), the keyboard, the monitor, and so on.  
Software: Software refers to the programs and applications that run on a computer or any electronic device. It's the non-tangible part of the system, like the apps on your phone or computer, such as games, word processors, or web browsers.  
Operating System (OS): The operating system is like the boss of the computer. It's a type of software that manages the computer hardware and provides various services for computer programs. The operating system controls the computer's memory, processes, and all its software and hardware. It's the foundation on which all other software applications and programs run. Examples of operating systems include Windows, macOS, and Linux for computers, and iOS or Android for mobile devices.
  Comment by running2k: You mentioned you were learning how computers run....

In reality it is all hardware. The is no software.  Software is a label used to represent a physical structure inside the computer.  Namely, different voltages that are stored in memory in certain patterns.

The patterns of electricity determine what is shown on the monitor and you can change these voltages by clicking the mouse or hitting a key on your keyboard.
  Comment by PckMan: Hardware are all the physical bits, typically referring to the internal components. The motherboard is a large circuit board upon which all other components connect. The processor, the graphics card, the ram, the storage and the power supply, as well as a few other things, all are hardware. Physical components outside the computer like a mouse or a keyboard are called peripherals.

Software is all the intangible programs that run on a computer. Your browser, programs like windows excel or word, they're all software. The Operating System is also software, but it's the basic piece of software for a device that enables it to carry out basic functions and be more than just a brick. In a sense, the operating system is to software what the motherboard is to hardware. Everything connects to and works through it.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: chronic wasting disease and “mis-folded” proteins
Author: billybooyanks
Score: 20
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rpmfz/eli5_chronic_wasting_disease_and_misfolded/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Hayred: A note, because this is a misunderstanding I held for years because of the way people say "prions make proteins misfold."

There is only ONE prion protein encoded by your DNA (in mammals). It's name is PRP. It exists mostly as a nice helpful form we term PRPc. The 'bad' form is termed PRPsc. PRP is the ONLY protein that gets misfolded in prion disease.

PRPsc bumps into normal PRPc and screws it up. We don't yet know exactly how, but one of our best theories is that there's a region on both PRPc and PRPsc where there are some complementary amino acids. Their side-chains (molecular bits that stick off the main molecule and do the things that make each amino different) "zip" together and it pulls PRPc from it's normal shape which has lots of helixes, into PRPsc shape, which has lots of sheets.

You can have different 'strains' of PRPsc - same misfolded protein, just comes in different shapes, same as you can have different strains of a virus. Regardless, PRPsc ONLY directly makes PRPc misfold, not anything else.
  Comment by ArtisticPollution448: Proteins are complex chemicals that our cells use to do stuff. There are a very very large number of proteins that we need to all work very well.

Sometimes, proteins don't work right- they "mis-fold" and don't do the function they need to do. That's okay, normally, if it only happens occasionally because your body will clean it up.

A prion is a protein that misfolded in such a bad way that it causes other similar proteins to mis-fold in the exact same way. Every time it encounters a healthy version of the protein it causes it to become another prion.

This leaves your body with fewer and fewer healthy copies of the original protein. And your body needed that protein to do whatever job it had.

It's contagious only if you somehow get that protein from one sick person into another. Strangely, this is sometimes caused by accidental or intentional cannibalism between animals.
  Comment by -LsDmThC-: We know a ton about prions, they are misfolded insoluble proteins. See, the inside of your body is largely an aqueous solution, which just basically means you are full of mostly water. Proteins typically have hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions, and the way this interacts with the solution it is partly determines its 3d structure (think how oil is repelled by water, the hydrophobic regions fold into the interior of the protein complex while the hydrophilic areas which are attracted to the aqueous solution go to the exterior). Prions happen can occur when the hydrophobic regions end up on the exterior of the protein complex, and it becomes insoluble in your body. Other similar proteins that come into contact with these prions can have their structure “flipped” such that the hydrophobic regions end up on the outside of the complex (because they are attracted to the similarly hydrophobic exterior of the prion). These misfolded prions then form insoluble aggregates which can hinder the function of surrounding tissues.
  Comment by The_RealKeyserSoze: Prion diseases are misfolded copies of the [prion protein](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Major_prion_protein) which is a protein found in the brain which carries out some important roles in cognition but its exact roles are not fully understood.

Proteins are chains of chemicals with 3D structures, but those structures can change and regularly do. They are like machines and have to change their shape to carry out tasks.

Prion diseases occur when a misfolded copy of the prion protein comes in contact with normal forms and causes them to misfold. When infected this happens all over the body but it has detrimental effects in the brain causing parts of the brain to stop functioning and is though to be 100% lethal. 

Prion diseases are caused by:

1. Spontaneously through [very rare misfolding events](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29887134/)

2. Genetically, passed down in families (e.g. [FFI](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fatal_insomnia))

3. Infectious, usually spread through contaminated meat and possibly through blood transfusions. This is how [mad cow disease](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bovine_spongiform_encephalopathy) and [kuru](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kuru_(disease)) spread.

CWD so far hasn’t caused any human cases but it can infect monkeys so eating contaminated deer or elk might pose a risk and hunters are advised not to eat any animals that look skinny or sickly. CWD is likely is spread by fluids, feces and urine. Particularly when deer eat plants with infected feces/urine on them. Fortunately, prion disease outbreaks have all been relatively small as prions are not very good at spreading. Mad cow was the largest infectious  prion outbreak but was the result of horrific practices/lack of safety precautions in the beef industry. Most prion disease in humans is rare/spontaneous.
  Comment by MrWedge18: Proteins are the machines of life. When something needs to be done, it's probably a protein getting it done. And much like our man-made machines, the shape is vital to it's functionality. A truck with it's wheels on top isn't very useful after all.

A protein is made by daisy chaining a bunch of molecules together and then folding it into the right shape. So a mis-folded protein is a truck with wheels on top and can't do it's job.

Not sure about how it spreads though.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: eli5 Natural oxygen in your blood versus air bubbles in an IV
Author: RollForParadise
Score: 12
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rp4xy/eli5_natural_oxygen_in_your_blood_versus_air/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by the_quark: First of all, I’ll note that air isn’t mostly oxygen - it’s mostly nitrogen. The oxygen’s only about 21% of it.

Secondly, the oxygen in your blood is dissolved into your blood - much like CO2 is dissolved into carbonated water.

An “air bubble” in your blood is a section in your arteries with no blood in it, just air. When it gets to your heart, it can cause a physical disruption in the distribution of your blood. If you’re particularly unlucky, it makes it so that your heart is empty of blood. Without blood in it, the heart’s pumping doesn’t have anything to push around - so your blood stops circulating, and you die.
  Comment by itisisntit123: Air /=/ Oxygen

Air is made up of mostly nitrogen.

But it takes a considerable amount of air injected into a vein to cause damage.  We even purposely inject an air bubble for a diagnostic procedure called a bubble study to check for an anatomical defect of the heart called a patent foramen ovale.
  Comment by talashrrg: In addition to what everyone else said, it actually takes a relatively large amount of air injected into a vein to cause harm, like 100mL. Smaller amounts are dangerous if injected into an artery, but generally nothing is injected into arteries to begin with.
  Comment by TheJeeronian: There should never be any gas in your blood. There is some oxygen and nitrogen stored in it, but not as a gas. It is absorbed into the liquid - dissolved.

If it for some reason stopped being dissolved and formed a gas again, then you'd have the same medical issues as if a foreign bubble was inserted in.
  Comment by oblivious_fireball: Some of the oxygen circulating in your blood is bound to your red blood cells. The rest of the oxygen and nitrogen naturally dissolves into your blood, but there's a limit to how much and how fast gases can dissolve into your blood.

A visible and large air bubble in your IV is NOT going to easily break up and dissolve, and in a contained space like your blood vessels, that air bubble forms a space where blood cells can't pass through, in many ways its causing the same issues as if your blood formed a clot.

This is also the reason why ascending very quickly from very deep water is dangerous. Under higher pressure your blood can hold more dissolved gases, but if the water pressure is relieved too fast, nitrogen in your blood can come out of its dissolved state and form lots of little bubbles.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Why do some beaches and islands like the Maldives, Philippines etc have pristine clear waters whereas most of the world’s beaches do not
Author: koalashell
Score: 1052
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rob0b/eli5_why_do_some_beaches_and_islands_like_the/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Ridley_Himself: A lot of the white sand beaches have sand made of calcite from broken up coral. Corals have a symbiotic relationship with algae, which depends on sunlight and fairly clear waters: mainly water that does not have a lot of algae or suspended sediment.

In other areas, most of the sand is sediment from the land either delivered to the sea by glaciers or rivers or eroded right from the local bedrock. This kind of sand, usually rich in quartz with some other minerals mixed in, often works out to a gray or tan color. If rivers are delivering a lot of sediment, it's going to cloud up the water and make it hard for corals to grow.
  Comment by Pescodar189: Lots of reasons contribute to each specific example, but I’m pretty sure the most significant impact worldwide comes from **plankton**.

They are the main cause of not-clear water in many temperate ocean beaches.  Some of the other causes feed on plankton.

In general over time, nutrients become concentrated deeper in the ocean unless something mixes the layers of the water.  In temperate environments, the heating and cooling of the water (generally speaking) causes this mixing.  But in tropical water that is always warm, this doesn’t happen.

Phytoplankton (plant plankton) need nutrients and sunlight to grow.  Sunlight is mostly available near the surface, so for them to thrive, nutrients need to make their way to the surface.  Animal plankton need phytoplankton to eat, so can’t thrive without them.  Even if phytoplankton is doing okay in an area but not thriving, other species like coral might consume them ~all, leaving the water ~clear.

tl;dr: plankton generally don’t thrive in places where the layers of water aren’t mixed
  Comment by KillerOfSouls665: It is to do with the type of sea bed. Some types of sediment *don't* become particles in the water, making it clearer. Around the Maldives and Philippines, the seabed is very stable, not releasing particles.
  Comment by sciguy52: Long time ago my professor said the reason some regions have clear water is due to a lack of nutrients in the water thus there was not a lot of plankton. He noted tropical waters that were clear were nutrient poor.
  Comment by AnnonymousRedditor86: Lots of comments about coral and stuff are correct. But, there is another way to have clear water and sugar-white sand. 

&#x200B;

You start with a large mountain range made predominantly of granite (which contains high amounts of quartz), and a watershed dissolves that granite and carries it out to sea. But, not just any sea - it has to be a large body of water with a very gradual dropoff, so that you don't get huge waves bringing sediment towards the beach. Over millions of years, the watershed/river carries more and more granite/quartz to the sea, and the small waves of the sea grind it up into suggary-white sand. And, because not a lot of plant life can grow in quartz,  there are few plants, and therefore few animals. So, you end up with white sand and clear water. 

  
And that's how you get Destin, FL (the entire panhandle, from Pensacola to Panama City Beach, to be honest). Quite literally, some of the most beautiful beaches in the entire world.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: eli5 +- vs -, is there a difference?
Author: Bananapocalypse543
Score: 2
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rnxdn/eli5_vs_is_there_a_difference/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by rabbiskittles: AFAIK, for regular arithmetic, there is no difference between adding a negative or subtracting the absolute value of that negative, so those two should be equivalent. I could be wrong, but especially for the type of equation you provided, I can’t think of a scenario where those would be different.

If it was automatically graded, like an online thing, it’s very possible it’s just a bug of sorts.

There might be some examples in high level math of a particular vector space or other field on which adding a negative is not defined the same as subtraction, but from the context it doesn’t sound like that’s relevant.
  Comment by SurprisedPotato: Adding a negative number is the same as subtracting the corresponding positive number: so "17 plus negative 3" is the same as "17 minus 3"

The quibble I would have with 2x+3y+-14 is that the +- symbols together aren't standard notation. To make your intention clear, you should have written 2x+3y+(-14) .... or simplified it to 2x+3y-14
  Comment by Caucasiafro: Those result in the exact same meaning, so you are  correct.

However, I think marking your answer incorrect was still the right call. That's because one thing that you will see in math is:

 **+/-** 

Notice the **/** inbetween the plus and the minus, That means "plus OR minus" which is when both subtraction OR addition are correct (I can go into more detail about how/why if you want) so +- looks a bit too much like that. The same reason we stop using "x" for multiplication eventually and switch parentheses, \* or just smushing the two variables together.
  Comment by Digital-Chupacabra: I clearly need more sleep. As pointed out it's almost certainly + (- number)

~~+- means + or -~~

~~So `2x+3y+-14` means both `2x+3y+14` and `2x+3y-14` are valid.~~

~~Does that help?~~
  Comment by homeboi808: Are you sure the test directions didn’t state to give the answers in standard form or something like that? That’s the only way I can see why they’d use “+-” instead of “-”.  
  
For this level of math it’s the same, can’t remember if it matters for higher math (my Bachelor’s is in math but I forget; maybe in some type of space where + & - aren’t inverses).

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Why is clonazepam on the niosh list, put its sister drugs (alprazolam, lorazepam) aren't?
Author: TheParadoxigm
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rng2b/eli5_why_is_clonazepam_on_the_niosh_list_put_its/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Ksbsingle: Almost all NIOSH meds or "hazardous" meds are on the list due to either being a hormone (estrogen/testosterone), changing hormone levels(spironolactone), causing birth defects, or having the potential of serious side effects if exposed. Most of the list and rules were based on compounding practices as if you were crushing large amounts of tablets or using them in a robot.

Clonazepam has issues in pregnancy thus on the NIOSH list other benzos must be safer: 

Klonopin use during pregnancy can lead the fetus to develop what is known as “floppy baby syndrome.” 

Or

A study of 314 children exposed to clonazepam during pregnancy found an increased chance of intellectual disability and delayed developmental milestones.
  Comment by None: [removed]
  Comment by Plaidomatic: It straight up says in the NIOSH docs. Increased risk of birth defects if take in the first trimester. First hit for Google “clonazepam niosh”
  Comment by None: [removed]
  Comment by TheParadoxigm: Interesting,  any idea what makes it so different from the others?

--------------------------------------------------

Title: Eli5: We got technology that mimics our eyes (camera), ears (mic), and mouth (speaker), what's the challenge in making technology of nose (smelling) and tongue (tasting) ?
Author: outerzenith
Score: 9
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rn4gs/eli5_we_got_technology_that_mimics_our_eyes/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by SciGuy45: Sight and hearing both deal with waves that are understood mostly by how far apart they are (wavelength) and how strong they are (amplitude). Vocal chords make noises of different types by complex shaking (vibrations). All of this is relatively straightforward. 

Taste and smell are due to thousands upon thousands of different molecules of different shapes and in lots of combinations. Dogs can smell really well in part because of how many genes they have for detecting different molecules in the air. That’s really hard to do. 

Scientists do have special instruments (chromatography, mass spec, spectroscopy) to determine what molecules are in things, but it’s pretty difficult.
  Comment by mrgonaka: The challenge is replicating particles for smell and taste, versus replicating waves (sight, sound).
  Comment by rasa2013: basically, the information is more simple for sound and light. They're just waves. And waves have some fairly simple properties. Contrast, smell and taste are chemical senses. Chemicals come in *many, many* forms. It's a lot. Two chemicals that are very similar can taste drastically different depending on their shape and specifics. 

Also, we have very good math for understanding how to simplify complex waveforms into a combination of simpler waves. There isn't an equivalent for chemicals.
  Comment by Quantum-Bot: It depends on what you count… Taste and smell are chemical senses, they give us hints as to what chemicals are in our food and air. We have plenty of ways of testing for the presence of different chemicals, like adding an indicator substance to a solution to test how acidic it is. Cameras also encode images in a completely different way to how our brains do, so if cameras count as eye technology then who’s to say the former doesn’t also count as taste technology?
  Comment by randomjapaneselearn: oh there is the smelling part:

\-smoke detectors

\-gas leakage detectors

about tasting i guess that we have it too:

\-i saw in tv program airport security that they have devices that can detect if a substance is drug, they put some into it and it gives the result.

kind of chemical analysis, that is kinda close...

--------------------------------------------------

Title: Eli5: How come lasers don’t go as far as the thing in front of it? Does the light just fade away over the distance?
Author: serversideguy
Score: 121
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rmys9/eli5_how_come_lasers_dont_go_as_far_as_the_thing/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by left_lane_camper: So there's a couple things happening here.

First, laser beams are not perfectly straight beams, but just really narrow cones. They spread out like any other source of light does as they travel, making the laser spot bigger and bigger the farther away you get from the laser. Spreading the same amount of light over a larger area makes each part of the spot dimmer.

Second, light is absorbed or scattered when passing through something, like glass or air. Absorbance is where the material stops a bit of the light and converts it into heat (or, rarely, something else). Scattering is where the material re-directs some of the light into a different direction. This is why you can see where a laser beam is when there's a lot of dust or smoke in the air: the dust/smoke causes some of the light in the beam to scatter out in different directions, and some of that scattered light makes it back to your eyes. Absorbance and scattering lessen the total amount of light in the laser beam as it travels.

So if you're shooting a laser beam at something in space, the spot will usually be very large by the time it reaches it. For another star, the spot would be many billions of miles across and so incredibly dim by the time it reaches there. There is very little stuff in space, though, so unless you're shooting the beam through a cloud of something in space or over very, very long distances, we can ignore the effects of scattering and absorbance and just look at the spot getting bigger and spreading the light out over a larger and larger area.
  Comment by rc3105: Lasers DO generally go as far as the first object, the question is whether or not the beam is too diffused for any reflection to be visible.

The Apollo astronauts left laser reflectors on the moon.  Any fool with the right equipment can bounce a laser off the reflectors and use it to measure the precise distance.

You can’t see that reflection with your eyes, you need special equipment thats insanely sensitive.

Some of the more powerful laser pointers, particularly green, are bright enough and well focused enough to produce a visible reflection from say a white water tower several miles off.  I used to have a 300mw green laser that put a nice bright spot on a water tower 4.5 miles away.

I have a 2.5w uv laser similarly detectable at extreme range if you have a phone/camera sensitive to the proper uv spectrum.
  Comment by Reasonable-Broccoli0: The problem with lasers is that while the light will hit a far away planet object, the light has to bounce back from the planet object and hit your eye for you to see it. Once the laser hits an object, the light is scattered in many different directions and the further away you are, the less chance a photon is going to hit your eye.
  Comment by extra2002: As others have explained, the beam gets spread out so it's less intense the farther it goes. In the absence of absorption and scattering, the intensity drops by 1 / distance^2 . Then it reflects off something and heads back toward your eye, and this beam, too, fades proportional to 1 / distance^2 . The final brightness of what you see is the product of these two, so it gets dimmer proportional to 1 / distance^4 ‐‐ this is called the "radar equation" for obvious reasons, but applies to light as well.
  Comment by Infamous-Reply-8121: think of a laser beam like a really narrow flashlight. when you shine a flashlight, the light spreads out gradually as it travels farther, right? with a laser, it's more focused, but it still spreads out over distance due to something called "beam divergence." this means the beam gets wider as it travels, making it seem like it's not reaching as far as the actual object you're aiming at.

also, factors like air particles, dust, and humidity can scatter the light, causing it to weaken or fade away over distance, kind of like how fog can make distant things harder to see clearly. so, it's not that the light disappears completely, but it becomes less concentrated and weaker the farther it travels.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: Eli5 How were the nazis able to conduct the holocaust and war efforts simultaneously?
Author: Redbullgnardude
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rlz92/eli5_how_were_the_nazis_able_to_conduct_the/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by RhynoD: Well, for starters, they couldn't. Nazi generals begged Hitler to send traincars full of Jews to the front lines to be used as fodder to soak up Russian bullets. Not like the Russian army would have cared too much to protect the Jews. Hitler was determined to send them to concentration camps instead. As the war continued, his generals begged him to just stop sending cars full of Jews all the way back into Germany and Austria and spend more resources for the war effort. 

Regardless, the Holocaust didn't take *that* many resources away from the war. Trains had to travel back to pick up supplies anyway. It's not like they gave much food to the prisoners, especially after they started the "final solution." Guards were needed, for sure, but not much more than they needed to handle war prisoners, and you need to keep soldiers in reserve to protect your back lines. 

Again, though, the Final Solution itself wasn't a solution to their supply line problem. They had to transport the gas and, of course, collect and move all their prisoners to the death camps. That took a lot of effort away from the war. Hitler's generals tried to assassinate him to stop it. It isn't the only reason they lost, by a long shot, but it definitely didn't help.
  Comment by Firm_Bit: Yep, but even they knew it was stretching them thin. Hitler was obsessed, as were others, but many in the military understood that those efforts were distractions from the war effort. Hell, many of the actual war efforts were distractions from the war effort. For example, hitler pledged help to moussillini (however you spell it) after the Italians got their butts handed to them in the Greek/albanian campaign. Even in the push eastward, generals warned that they were still engaged in the west and that Stalin was ok with the current borders. 

In short, in the micro the Germans were very efficient. That is, in day to day operations. But in the macro, total effort expended across the whole war, they were very inefficient and stretched themselves quite thin.
  Comment by copnonymous: Before the war began, many of the targeted groups had already been isolated. The ones targeted for their culture like Jews and Roma already lived in their own tight knit communities. The Nazis confiscated their businesses and homes, and paced them in walled off city neighborhoods called "ghettos". The mentally and physically infirm were also already in various assisted living facilities so they were easy to isolate. Not only that but any jew that stayed in Germany had certainly already been identified and forced to wear a yellow star on their clothes to identify themselves as Jews. So there were registries of all people required to have those stars. Which became registries of who was and wasnt gathered yet.

From there it was a matter of treating humans like cattle. Moving thousands at a time and holding them in cages and paddocks waiting for slaughter. It only took a couple hundred guards per camp at most.

until the start of the invasion of the Soviet Union the German army wasn't stretched all that much. They had taken much of Europe with relatively few loses. At that stage they engaged in an air war with Britain. So no infantry troops were tied up. Once the allies opened up the second front in France, the Nazis began to get spread thin. By then the Nazis had already begun murdering the targets of their Holocaust in the hundreds of thousands. So they merely consolidated what was left of the populations of their camps and ghettos was a simple matter.
  Comment by bangdazap: Slavery is the most profitable form of labor, and the Nazis gassed those deemed unable to work, while working the rest to death. There were some drawbacks like sabotage of weapons by the slaves, but on the whole it was a net plus for the Nazi economy. Wernher von Braun (later of US space program fame) murdered 12,000 slaves building the V2 terror rocket.

They also looted their victims of everything of value, wedding rings, jewelry, even gold fillings pried from the corpses by other prisoners.

The Nazi war effort was aided by a series of bungles by the Allies: Munich sell-out, not invading Germany during the invasion of Poland, the unexpected collapse of the French in 1940, the Soviets being caught with their pants down in 1941 etc.

They also had (unfortunately for the 20+ million dead) the best infantry in the world, mission type tactics where the Allies relied on obsolete doctrines and so on. But it is a fact that they mostly relied on horses and trains for logistics where the UK and USA had an economy capable of complete mechanization.
  Comment by iohognbdfh11: Also a lot of the jobs in concentration camps were done by prisoners and not the SS. Prisoners were basically turned against each other to try and get extra privileges and save themselves. 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kapo

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Why does the central bank's interest rate affect existing mortgages, especially the average home owners' mortgage?
Author: eggtart_prince
Score: 223
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rk7ry/eli5_why_does_the_central_banks_interest_rate/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Ansuz07: The central bank sets the rate that banks charge _other banks_ for overnight loans to meet reserve requirements.  You have to have a certain percentage of your total deposits on deposit with the central bank - if you are short, you can borrow from another bank that has too much and if you have too much, you can loan to another bank.

If the central bank rate is low, then you aren't too worried about being short - you can borrow from other banks pretty cheaply.  This incentivizes you to loan out more money at a lower interest rate (since the rate you get from other banks is really low too).  

If the central bank rate is high, then you are very worried about being short - you don't want to pay the high-interest rates to borrow from other banks.  This incentivizes you to keep more money on hand to meet requirements, and the money you do loan out has to be at a higher interest rate (since the rate you get from other banks is higher).

Yes, the interest rate hikes do hurt folks who want mortgages, but they are just one part of the larger economy.  Slowing down lending is one of the key levers we can pull to lower inflation - less lending means less spending and less spending means inflation (should) slow down.

It won't affect loans already issued, but any loan that has yet to go through, or any loan with an adjustable rate will be impacted.
  Comment by 2squishmaster: What country are you in? In the United States mortgages are generally fixed rate so it would not affect existing mortgages at all. You'd have to specifically take out a variable interest rate mortgage which is generally a terrible idea for that exact reason.
  Comment by jbam46: In Canada variable rate mortgages are common and their monthly payment can change frequently depending on how its set up as interest rates change. There are trigger rates etc. but even if they aren't on Variable everyone has to renew at a certain time interval.


Common renewal times are every 3 or 5 years. So in Canada everyone talks about it because maybe 25% of ppl are renewing their mortgage every year and will instantly be affected by whatever the new interest rates are.

This can be a very substantial increase as rates have increased a lot in the past 5 years.

People also took out huge mortgages so the added percentage points really affects the monthly mortgage bill.
  Comment by pembquist: A lot of people are going to assume you are talking about the USA and they don't realize that the 30 fixed rate Mortgage that is so common in the US is a freakish thing that only exists because the US housing policy is driven by home ownership and their is a tacit subsidy for these kinds of loans. 

Obviously if you have a fixed rate long term loan rising or falling central bank rates don't effect the size of your mortgage payment. Currently in the US this has created a perverse incentive not to sell a house you have a low rate mortgage on thus draining natural supply from the housing market causing house prices to climb which coupled with higher interest rates makes housing terribly unaffordable causing low rate mortgage holders to be even more reluctant to sell.

The case in most countries that have mortgages and for adjustable rate mortgages in the USA is that when interest rates go up is that the housing payment goes up as it is composed of repayment of principal and the interest on the money owed.
  Comment by SCarolinaSoccerNut: If you live in almost any wealthy country other than the US, then the interest you pay on your mortgage adjusts based on the market rate. This is especially so if you have adjustable-rate mortgages that adjust on very routine basis. Sometimes you're able to get fixed-rate mortgages that fix the interest for a certain number of years, but then they reset to another rate based on the market and get fixed to that for a number of years.

If you live in the US, though, the above situation is the minority. Thanks to a federal program to securitize home loans, American mortgage brokers and banks offer 15-year or 30-year mortgages where the interest rate is fixed for the entire duration of the loan. In such a cases, the Fed can raise its interest rates up the wazoo and it wouldn't have an effect on your home loan. The large majority of mortgages in the US are these non-adjustable loans.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5 How do game console downloads work?
Author: the-overloaf
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rjxk9/eli5_how_do_game_console_downloads_work/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by TehWildMan_: Optical Media is pretty terrible for reading data off quickly, and with modem consoles it's no longer sufficient without causing very long load times.

The Nintendo switch uses flash cartridges instead, but also runs less powerful hardware, so visual assets such as models/textures/videos don't have to be as detailed.
  Comment by didntplaymysummercar: Nintendo has smaller and faster flash cartriges, PS and XB use bigger but slower optical discs (blu-ray now, other stuff in the past). Same as Nintendo 64 and NES did, versus PS1 and 2. Plus the console is less powerful so they have less data, and quality control is (was? in the past) more stingent so they might not accept load times.
  Comment by TomChai: The Blu-ray drives disc consoles use typically reads at about 25MB/s and hundreds of milliseconds on random seeks, pathetically slow for modern games.

That’s why PS3 and Xbox 360 were the last generations which games can run directly from discs, games weren’t that data hungry back then they were released but certainly start to grow during the last years of those consoles. GTA 5 requires installation even on Xbox 360 despite the 360 disc drive runs faster than that of the PS3.
  Comment by MissionBee7895: > GTA 5 requires installation even on Xbox 360 despite the 360 disc drive runs faster than that of the PS3.

That's because the Xbox 360 used DVDs, while the PS3 used Blu-Rays. So many Xbox 360 games had to be installed because they couldn't physically fit on a single disk. To my knowledge, the PS3 never had a single multi-disk game.
  Comment by TomChai: The Xbox 360 digital version of GTA 5 is actually slightly slower than disc based ones, because the disc version runs from two storage devices.

Not sure how that plays on the PS3.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5 How does HDDs doesn't break if even moved a little bit when the plates are closer to each other than the size of a bacteria?
Author: lolazamzam
Score: 20
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18riyw5/eli5_how_does_hdds_doesnt_break_if_even_moved_a/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by jbtronics: It's not the plate which are so close to each other (that would be in the Millimeter range). It's the distance between the plate and the head which is used to read and write magnetic info from the plates.

If the HDD is not in use, the head is normally in a parking position far from the plates, so that vibrations don't cause harm.

For operation there are dampers, which can compensate small vibrations. But on heavy impacts, while the HDD is in use, the head can crash on the plates, which basically destroys it.
  Comment by lolazamzam: aaah yea, ok thank you for the precision! It does sounds more "realistic" that way ahah Those dampers are really efficient at their jobs I must say.
  Comment by SoulWager: There's also a cushion of air between the head and the plate, kept intact by the fact the plate is spinning and drawing more air in there.
  Comment by Admirable-Shift-632: Also stuff like laptop hdds have a “free fall” sensor that detects if it’s in the air -> parks the head-> avoids damage
  Comment by MoistPete: You reminded me of a fun video about the effects of shouting at hard drives in an old data center:

https://youtu.be/tDacjrSCeq4?si=N9RDnoUejfBrTn6c

SSDs are now way more widely used and fortunately don't have as many problems. No plates, just basically flash drives.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: What are war crimes?
Author: Humpty_Dumps
Score: 14
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18riuiv/eli5_what_are_war_crimes/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by KaseQuarkI: At some point, people decided to make some rules for war to make it less horrible. If you break these rules, you're commiting a war crime.

For example, you're not allowed to shoot medics.
  Comment by umlguru: Answer: war crimes are described by the Geneva Conventions and Rome Protocols. They set rules for what groups can and can't do when fighting wars. The rules are very complicated, so militaries from countries like the US, UK, Canada, Netherlands, Israel,  France, and other NATO countries participating in armed conflict have lawyers that specialize in war crimes working with the units.

Some things that are war crimes are well recognized and easier to understand. You are not allowed to use poison gas or biological weapons against an enemy. You are not allowed to rape civilians or prisoners. You have to treat prisoners of war fairly and let the Red Cross have access to them.

Some things are harder to understand. You are not allowed to target noncombatants, but if the enemy is using them as human shields, there is a term called military necessity that allows you to. Similarly, you aren't supposed to attack hospitals, schools, or religious buildings. But if a sniper is on the roof or they are firing missiles at you from there, you can. You are not allowed to put weapons or military headquarters in or under hospitals or schools in an effort to protect your own people. If you do, you can be attacked and it isn't a war crime.

Like I said, it is very complicated and people need to read a lot to understand. I suggest staying with the International Criminal Court website: https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule156#:~:text=The%20Statute%20of%20the%20International,1%5D%20The%20Statutes%20of%20the
  Comment by KillerOfSouls665: All countries have agreed to reduce the suffering of war to non combatants. In the medieval period, entire populations of civilians were slaughtered by armies and prisoners of war executed.

So at the end of the 19th century, countries came together to say how to deal with civilians and prisoners of war. 

So you cannot deliberately damage civilian infrastructure such as destroying farm fields or poisoning wells. 

You also can't use weapons that have a disproportionate amount of damage to civilians such as chemical or biological weapons. As these cannot tell who is a combatant or not. 

And enemy soldiers injured must be looked after and treated with respect and dignity. 

The Red Cross/Cresent/Diamond is a international symbol of medical aid. These workers cannot be impaired in any way and must be allowed to treat injured people. Even if they are enemy combatants.

These rules are upheld by the international criminal court, although many countries do not sign up, most notably the USA. However if you lose a war, the enemy can charge captured officials and soldiers with war crimes. 

During the Nuremberg trials, the nazi officers were charged with war crimes, crimes against humanity (genocide), and crimes against peace. Many were executed for these crimes.
  Comment by Lord0fHats: There are two kinds of war crimes;

1. as defined by international laws and mutual agreements like the Geneva conventions. These are conventions like not wantonly killing civilians, targeting medics, or using chemical weapons like white phosphorus. 
2. as are rhetorically useful in propaganda because even a war conducted by international standards is often ugly, bloody, and unpleasant, and the modern world and mass media have made it very easy to make an enemy look bad by calling something a war crime.
  Comment by Atavast: [https://www.un.org/en/genocideprevention/war-crimes.shtml](https://www.un.org/en/genocideprevention/war-crimes.shtml)

&#x200B;

Activities that people agreed to define as war crimes in various treaties, such as the Anti-Personnel Landmines Convention [https://disarmament.unoda.org/anti-personnel-landmines-convention/](https://disarmament.unoda.org/anti-personnel-landmines-convention/)  or the various Geneva Conventions [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geneva\_Conventions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geneva_Conventions)

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Noise cancellation?
Author: r0gerii
Score: 2
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18ricp5/eli5_noise_cancellation/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by The_RealKeyserSoze: Sound is a wave, if you produce an exact opposite wave it will cancel out the sound wave and you get silence. The headphones have microphones to listen to the ambient sound then produce opposite sound waves in addition to the audio you listen to.

Imagine if you had two waves in the ocean cross where the top of one wave crossed where the low part of the next wave was, you’d get flat water. The headphones do something similar to that.
  Comment by Super_NiceGuy: What I find fascinating about noice cancellation is that for the noice to be cancelled your head phone needs to pick up the sound, make an identical but opposite sound wave and deliver that to your ear at the same time and the procedure needs to be calculated between when the sound reaches your headphone and when the sound leaves the small speakers. Calculation and execution in the time it takes sound to travel 1-2 centimeters.  


Edit: To my understanding. I’m no physicist.
  Comment by throwaway2000x3: Gonna ask a question here since we're talking noise canceling:

What are the best noise canceling headphones y'all have experienced/used?

P.s. looking for ones that cup/cover the entire ear rather than ones that just sit on your ears.

I have Very Severe sensitivity to sound and have ringing in my ears when overexposed to something too loud so I need something to make my environments as quiet as possible
  Comment by WRSaunders: Sound is a wave, but you only have 2 ears.  That means that if two sounds go into your ear, like from a violin and a clarinet, your ear drum is vibrated with violin + clarinet.  You hear one sound wave with two sources.  If you're an experienced/trained listener to classical music, your brain can easily separate these sounds in your head.  You still only heard the sum, but your brain is an excellent processor of sound.

What if we replace the clarinet with the opposite of the violin, which I'll call -violin.  Everything works the same but the violin + -violin adds up to zero, the sound wave of silence.  That's what the active cancellation does, it samples the noise and uses a speaker to make the -noise sound.
  Comment by Velvy71: Professor Hannah Fry presents a documentary “[The Secret Genius Of Modern Life](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt23844110/), and episode S2.E5 covers Headphones, with the help of Bose, and explains exceptionally well how the noise cancelling was invented and improved.  It’s free to watch on BBC iPlayer, you might need to cheat a little if you’re not in the UK.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Why do some wavelengths of radiation harm us while others don't affect us?
Author: iamcherry
Score: 12
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18ri9pv/eli5_why_do_some_wavelengths_of_radiation_harm_us/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by MercurianAspirations: Well the higher frequencies of EM radiation carry higher energy. This is why UV light, x-rays, and gamma rays can all be dangerous - they carry enough energy to damage tissue. A sunburn is actually a form of radiation burn because it's the skin's reaction to damage caused by UV exposure. X-rays and Gamma rays are also energetic enough to be ionizing - that is, they can strip the electrons off of atoms they come into contact with, which is very bad if those atoms are part of molecules in your cells. And very very bad if those molecules happen to be in your DNA, as this increases the risk of cancer developing. 

You might also be familiar with Alpha and Beta radioactive decay which are not the same thing as EM radiation and don't have wavelengths, because they are particles, not waves. But, they're still very harmful as the particles carry a lot of energy. In fact the burns caused by exposure to Beta radiation are quite similar to a sunburn. But these kinds of radiation are also ionizing, in fact moreso than EM radiation, so it is very bad for you. This is the kind of radiation associated with radioactive materials. Free neutrons are another product of nuclear reactions that are also harmful.
  Comment by Ms_Kratos: I will start the explanation by telling you that almost any wavelenght, given an emitter of enough power, can harm us.

Visible light is absolutely safe? Not really... With enough power, visible light can burn a human being really bad. With a little less power, it would be still dangerous to our eyes. (Think about lasers, and any laser in visible light spectrum would fall into this.) Plenty of examples here: [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laser\_weapon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laser_weapon) 

Microwaves? Not really too.... With enough power, microwaves can cause us harm, or even death. With a little less of power, are microwaves still effective enough to be a less-than-lethal heat-wave weapon.   [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Active\_Denial\_System](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Active_Denial_System) 

While some wavelenghts are ionizing. - And this is the keyword for "very dangerous". But why?

Non-ionizing radiation may heat something, but they wouldn't cause changes to most molecules. Including our DNA.

Ionizing radiation on the other hand, do penetrate into our cells, and corrupt our DNA, by ionizing the molecules.

[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ionizing\_radiation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ionizing_radiation)

The trick here is actually the frequency. Every ionizing radiation is high-frequency.

The range is from ultraviolet's to higher frequencies.

[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic\_spectrum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electromagnetic_spectrum)

It's not that those are instantly lethal in small doses, but contant exposure do cause harm as much as intensive exposure. (Imagine some cells getting their DNAs scrambled.... Some will die, some will turn into tumours.... The body can heal it up to a certain point, but not if it's too much. - Non-ionizing radiation doesn't cause this sort of damage.)

An interesting analogy between non-ionizing radiation and ionizing radiation would be comparing them to respectively a stone and a knife. - On that a stone need a much stronger throw for it to be dangerous, while a knife will still cause injury with less force.

But be aware? That ionizing Alpha and Beta particles, from nuclear decay, aren't electromagnetic wavelenghts like Gamma radiation, but are equally dangerous.

[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radiation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radiation)
  Comment by TheJeeronian: Any wavelength can cook you, since all light carries energy. However, when that light hits your body, it gives that heat to you in individual packets. Each packet will go to one individual electron, so if the packet is big enough to launch the electron away then it will, and this causes damage to whatever molecule the electron is in.

Lower frequencies (longer wavelengths) have smaller packets of energy, so they're unable to knock electrons around, while higher frequencies have larger packets which can kick electrons around with ease.
  Comment by qr0n0s: need more intake.

one 120 is not enough.

run the test with the case open and see the difference
  Comment by tincup_chalis: There's intensity and there's energy level...  Enough of either will do you in.

It's the same reason that some quantities (intensity) and temperatures (energy level) of water will kill you and others will not.  A glass of 40F water is refreshing, overboard in 40F water you have minutes to hours.  Other direction... Getting hit with 500F steam for any length of time and your family will save money on a casket that doesn't need to be propped open. ⚰️

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: employee stock option grant
Author: seanzee7893
Score: 10
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18ri13u/eli5_employee_stock_option_grant/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by WRSaunders: The company is reporting selling you 50 options worth $20 each (for $1000 total).  The exercise price is $55, saying you can buy shares of the stock at this price when you want to, after the vesting date of 5/1/25.

I'm concerned that you have the expiration date wrong, I'd expect that to be after the exercise date, maybe something like 12/1/33.

In the summer of 2025, you have these options that let you buy stock at $55.  If the company's trading price is $55, these are worth nothing as everybody can buy the stock for that.  If the trading price is $110, you can buy for $55 and have an investment worth twice what you paid for it.  If you get to the expiration date and the price never goes above $55, then the options were worthless.
  Comment by kbn_: I’ll assume this is a public company. Makes it easier.

Ignore the grant amount. It’s just an estimate. Look at the share price today. Let’s say it’s $75 per share. If you exercised all your options today, then sold the stock, you would have to front $2750, then would sell for a profit of $3750, netting $1000 in total (which, for the record, would be taxed as income whether you sell the shares immediately or not).

This is all if the share price is $75 on the vest date. If the share price goes up a *lot*, you could end up making a lot more. Let’s say the price goes up to $400/share. In that case, you still front $2750, but now those 50 shares are worth $20,000, so you make a profit of $17,500.

Now if the share price goes *down*, it could easily dip below the point where you make a profit on this. For example, at $40/share, you would *lose* money exercising the options.

This is what the options grant is worth when it vests. Until it vests it’s worthless and you shouldn’t mentally count it as compensation unless you apply some discount to the present. Also remember that if you leave the company, even after vesting, you usually only get 30-90 days to exercise the options before they expire entirely.

This is also all assuming a public company where you can easily turn shares into dollars by selling them to other investors on a public exchange. If the company is privately held, you won’t be able to turn shares into cash so easily. Some large private companies (like SpaceX) have internal liquidation events where they buy back shares from employees. For most private companies though, you’re stuck waiting for the company to go public or to get acquired by some other public company (or in some cases, for the company to raise more private capital and allow you to sell into the round, which isn’t commonly allowed).

TLDR: options are usually not worth a lot, even after they vest, and you shouldn’t assume they will be. I’ve received a lot of options grants over my career and never once cashed in (the one time I had the chance, the share price had sunk so far it would have been a loss anyway).
  Comment by LNinefingers: ELI5: 

Your uncle is promising to sell you a pokemon card if you want it a year and a half from now for $55. Today the card is worth $20, but if some time between 1.5 and 10 years from now it’s worth more than $55 you’ll be able to get that charizard from your uncle at a bargain price. If it’s never worth more than $55, you’ll never take him up on his offer, and probably gossip behind his back to your siblings about how your uncle is a cheap ass who wanted to pretend he was giving you something great when it turned out to be a worthless promise.
  Comment by Ms_Kratos: Sure thing.

Just for a start, have in mind options are stock derivatives. They are contracts for buying (or selling) stock at certain prices.

Also that options do have a due date. (Either you use them for buying the stock, or you better sell them, otherwise they will turn to dust by the expiration date. - **Unless those options are restricted in a way you "can't sell them".** \- you need to ask your employer about it.)

Now let's crunch the numbers....

**Grant amount: $1000** \-> This is how your options are priced. The whole ammount you have. Have in mind this price may go up or down by the market, if you are going to trade it. (What now is $1000 in options, can become $800 or $1200 or... Depends on the market performance of that company.

**Number of options: 50** \-> Means you got 50 options. So you can use those for buying 50 stocks of that company. Also? $1000 / 50 = $20 (This is the individual price for each option, $20).

**Exercise price: $55** \-> Means that with those options, you can buy stock for $55. So... Since you do have 50 options? By investing $2750 and exercising the options, you will get 50 in stock of that company.Know that, if it's a good or bad deal, depends on the current price of that company. (PM me, and I can send you the current price, and more info, if you are itnerested.)

**Grant date: 12/01/2023** \-> When it will be granted to you. (On most countries, you would need to create an account at a stock broker, or at a bank with stoke broker, for you to receive those in your account. In others, you will receive a paper with a code you can refer to in a stock broker and either sell or exercise the options - but you will need to register an account anyway.)

**Vest date: 100% of award vests on 05/01/2025** \-> This is the date you can sell all stock you got by exercising those options. (I think your grant is restricted, this isn't something you will usually find on unrestricted grants...)

**~~Option expiration: 12/01/2023~~** ~~-> The date those options will turn to dust. Since it's the same as the grant date, I think those may be restricted. (~~**~~Ask your employer about if you can or can't sell the options on the market.~~**~~)~~ (Edit - fixing the date.)

**Option expiration: 12/01/2033** \-> The date those options will turn to dust. You apparently have some time for deciding to sell or not them.  A good thing. (Ask your employer about if you can or can't sell the options on the market.)
  Comment by ReshKayden: So first, it might help to understand why “options“ are a thing at all.

The IRS does not particularly care how I pay you for your work. I could pay you in cash, gold bars, real estate, stock… It doesn’t matter. The IRS considers that income, and you owe income taxes on the value of whatever I gave you.

The trouble is, most new companies are not successful. If I choose to pay you in stock of my private company, and that stock has a value, you will owe income taxes on it. But there’s a decent chance the company will fail, and that stock will end up being worthless. Now you may have paid taxes on something that has no value, which is not exactly a good thing for you, risk-wise.

So, someone came up with a clever idea: Instead of simply giving you the stock outright, I set the stock aside for you, and I instead give you a contract. That contract says that I am giving you the “option to buy” that stock from me at a future date, at a fixed price way less than the stock is actually worth.

Because I have never actually given you something of value yet — it’s set aside for you, but you do not “own” it — you do not owe taxes on it. And if the company fails in the future, sure, that stock will be worthless, but you will not have actually lost anything. And so paying people in options, rather than in stock outright, has become the standard way to do it in smaller companies.

You “exercise“ your option when you buy the stock at the reduced contractual price of $55/share. (Called the “strike price” or “exercise price.”) The stock is now officially “yours.” You can hold onto it, or you can sell it at the higher price ($1000/share) and pocket the difference. But you will now owe taxes on it. And if the company is not public, that means there is no public stock market for you to sell your stock on to begin with, so that’s not super useful.

So, in most cases, there is no reason to exercise your stock until the company has become extremely successful. If the company sells to another company, then that company will usually buy your stock from you. Or if the company goes public, then you can sell your stock on the open market. But until then, even if they are worth $1000 on paper, they’re worth nothing in practice because there’s no one to buy them. So no point in exercising.

Now the company does not want to give you options, you immediately exercise them, and then you either quit or get fired a few months later. Now they have someone potentially hostile to the company that owns some of their stock. Not good. So most options plans come with a cooldown period, or a “vesting” schedule. In this case, your options do not “vest” (become available for you to exercise) until 2025. If you leave the company for any reason before then, you lose the option entirely.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: Eli5: Why does n^0 equal 1?
Author: Birchtri
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rhzru/eli5_why_does_n0_equal_1/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Sloogs: There are a lot of ways to explain this so I'll take a stab at it. A few people have shown methods working backwards from higher exponents but I think sometimes you still have to suspend your disbelief a little bit to be convinced by them or not have further questions. So it might also help to see an algebraic proof, so you can see that the algebra actually works the way it's supposed to starting from x^(0) and going from there to get 1, step by step. The cool thing about algebraic proofs is how powerful they are. They show that you could replace *x* and *a* with any number and the math still works (except when x or a = 0). :)

|Equation|Reason|
|:-|:-|
|x^(0) = x^(a - a)|Because 0 = a - a|
|= x^(a + -a)|Because integer subtraction and adding a negative integer is the same, e.g. a - b = a + (-b)|
|= x^(a) ⋅ x^(-a)|Product Rule of exponents, e.g. x^(a + b) = x^(a) ⋅ x^(b) and vice versa|
|= x^(a) ⋅ 1/x^(a)|Negative Exponent Rule, e.g. x^(-a) = 1/x^(a)|
|= x^(a) / x^(a)|Multiplication of the terms from the previous step|
|= 1|Because something divided by itself equals 1|
  Comment by WRSaunders: 5^2 = 5 • 5 • 1

5^1 = 5 • 1

5^0 = 1

Seems simple.

You want N^x = N • N^x-1

For that to work for x=1, you need N^0 = 1 for all N
  Comment by 142muinotulp: Your edit is... just what? Fake math? What is real math to you?
  Comment by themonkery: It’s so simple that you’ll be surprised you didn’t get it before. Two things:

Every number contains a minimum of two factors. 1 and itself. For instance, the number 3 has the factors 1 and 3. What does this mean? Just that if you have **three** 1s or **one** 3 the result is the same, you have 3 total. If you were to divide 3 by 3 and *remove 3 as a factor*, all that is left is the number 1.

Now, *what is an exponent*?     
Take y = 3^x.    
What the above function is saying is that some number y has *x factors of 3*. In other words, y is some number with **x** 3s.

Take 9 is 3^2. We are representing 9 as factors of 3, of which there are 2. 
The key thing with exponents is to realize that *you are not looking at the simplest number* you’re looking at a representation of that number expressed in factors of another number.

You can even put fractions in the exponent, so the only way for the exponent to be 0 is if the number we are representing has *no extra factors at all*. *The only number that has no factors of any other number is 1.*

This isnt some cheap trick or hack. It’s literally part of the definition of an exponent
  Comment by eloquent_beaver: Because the multiplicative identity is 1.

That's technically a consequence of the ring axioms (the integers together with addition and multiplication form a ring).

And exponentiation (for non-negative integer exponents) can be defined as iterated multiplication. You can define it in terms of a recurrence relation (x^n = x⋅x^(n-1)), with the base case being x^0 = 1, which it has to be because the multiplicative identity is 1.

If you define it to be anything else, the relation x^n = x⋅x^(n-1) no longer holds. This relation can also be derived from the property x^(a+b) = x^(a)⋅x^(b). If you want to keep that invariant and yet try to define x^0 to be something other than 1, you're going to end up deriving a contradiction, making your mathematical system inconsistent.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: In which way does one calculate amperage usage?
Author: VexTheMaster
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rhx06/eli5_in_which_way_does_one_calculate_amperage/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by heypete1: Short answer: for this exercise, assume the voltage is 230V. The resulting current for a 300W device is 1.3A.

Longer answer: although it varies slightly throughout the day due to load on the electric grid, the mains electric voltage is nominally constant — usually 120V or 230V depending on your country. You can assume it’s constant for calculations like this one.

Your appliances, such as a lamp, are designed to operate on the nominal voltage provided in your country and that’s the value you should assume for calculations of this type unless you have a good reason to do otherwise (like the problem instructing you to use a different voltage).

Of course, many appliances can operate on a lower or higher voltage. For example, incandescent light bulbs will turn on at a lower voltage than their nominal operating voltage. This is one way to make a dimmable lamp. Labels on lamps and appliances typically list the maximum possible power a device will consume (e.g., 300W if the lamp is set on “high”, or some lesser value if on “medium” or “low”) for safety reasons.

Many portable electronic devices like laptops have “universal” power supplies that will work perfectly on a wide range of input voltages (like 100-240V) that let it be used anywhere in the world with a simple plug adapter rather than needing a voltage transformer. The total power would be the same, but the current would increase as the voltage decreased. Some devices (especially non-portable ones) do not, as my friend discovered when he shipped his 120V-only American TV from the US to Germany (which uses 240V) when he moved there for graduate school. The TV promptly caught on fire after it was plugged in.
  Comment by nesquikchocolate: As you already have two good answers for the question, perhaps just a bit of assistance on the terminology.

Amperage isn't "used". The same current flowing into a load is the same current flowing all the way back to the source. Anywhere along the same series circuit, the current measurement will be the same - AC for live going in and neutral returning, for DC positive going in and negative returning(by convention only). The current only lost all potential to do work by the time it reached the return voltage.
  Comment by dug99: You will get pretty close by I = P/V, so 300W / 230V because all consumer products' power ratings are based on a steady, full mains power supply and a lamp is a mostly resistive load.
  Comment by randomjapaneselearn: you need to use the voltage that will be applied to that lamp (that should match the voltage the lamp is designed to work with).

for example suppose that you need a wire to power on that lamp and it will be powered with 230V.

you do the math and find out 300/230=1,3A so you know that you need a wire thick enough that will not melt at 1,3A.

also note that usually stamped on the lamp there is also voltage, usually they sell a 300W - 230V lamp, not just a "300W lamp".

if you power the same lamp at 120V it will be less bright and less Watts.

while if you buy a 300W - 120V lamp and power it at 230V it will break

if you buy a car lamp it will say 300W - 12V, that 300W is only valid at 12V
  Comment by VexTheMaster: Thank you!

--------------------------------------------------

Title: Eli5 How water works to wash things away?
Author: sunnydale1993
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rht5a/eli5_how_water_works_to_wash_things_away/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by jayaram13: The key is hydrogen bonds.  Water has one oxygen molecules and two hydrogen molecules.  The hydrogen molecules like to bond loosely with other atoms, even in other molecules.  This loose bond is called hydrogen bonds.

This bonding is the reason why water feels sticky to us.  And for that same reason, water loosely sticks to dirt, clothes, and most other modules.

Microbes generally have a lipid (oil) membrane, which is hydrophobic, but they can pick up electrostatic charges, which allow hydrogen bonds to stick to them.

That's why we use soap to remove germs.  Soap molecule has two ends: one end is oil friendly and sticks to oil.  The other end is polar and sticks to water.  As a result, soap surrounds oily grime and germs, and water removes the entire thing away.

You absolutely don't need antibacterial soap.  Even regular soap bonds to the oily membrane around germs and tears it off, killing of the germs.  In that sense, all soap is antiseptic.
  Comment by HeavyDropFTW: If water can erode the Grand Canyon, then surely it can rinse some dirt off my hands.  

But seriously, soap does more of the dirt *lifting” from skin.  Water mostly just rinses that away.  

Do not use antibacterial soap at home.  Use regular soap.  Lather well.  Rinse well.  It’ll be nearly as effective - AND - you won’t be creating super bugs at home like they have in hospitals.
  Comment by bdtacchi: In some cases, there are substances that mixes with water. It is then easier to wash it away.

In most cases, you’re just expecting that the water running through and around the object will push away the stuff you don’t want.

In the case of bleach and similar substances, you use them because they have the ability of killing bacteria and other undesired microorganisms. You rinse them after as these substances can also be harmful for you. I guess water can also wash away some, but it won’t kill the remaining organisms.

And yes, it won’t wash away everything, but it will be clean enough that the small doses left aren’t harmful.
  Comment by Gargomon251: Water is called the universal solvent because it will dissolve many different things. It basically sticks to dirt etc and pulls it away from your skin (or other surfaces) . Soap works by surrounding the dirt and keeping it from sticking to your skin again once it's wet.
  Comment by cornerzcan: Bleach is very alkaline, therefore it breaks down fats, which is what you feel when you rub it between your fingers. Breaking down these organic materials is what makes it toxic to bacteria, and it’s also what allows water to carry them away from your hands, as the bleach breaks down the oils on your skin that retain the dirt and the bacteria, allowing them to be carried away by the water. You can accomplish the same thing by vigorous scrubbing and rinsing.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: eli5: Why can’t the battery ports all face the same way in a device?
Author: sodapop_curtiss
Score: 28
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rgtwp/eli5_why_cant_the_battery_ports_all_face_the_same/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by DeHackEd: When you connect batteries in a chain where one battery's + connects to the the next's - connection, you add the voltages together. AA batteries produce 1.5 volts each, so 2 batteries could make 3 volts if you arrange them like this.

So we have you put them in facing alternating ways. That way, the connection between the two batteries that I mentioned is just a small piece of metal that connects the two terminals on one side. Then the other side has the actual + and - for the "device"'s circuit board.

3 volts is generally better than 1.5, especially since the 1.5 will come down as the batteries drain.
  Comment by left_lane_camper: They can, you just have to have the wires connecting the batteries in the device go from head to tail and it's easier to just have the batteries alternate with a very short wire connecting them than have the wire cross over the battery compartment between each battery.

To understand why we need to do this, I like to think of the flow of electricity as being kind of like the flow of water. A battery is like a pump in this analogy and it has a low pressure (voltage) side where water (electricity) flows in and a high pressure (voltage) side where water (electricity) flows out. If we have multiple pumps and we connect the high pressure outlet of one to the low pressure inlet of another, they can work together. But if we connect the high pressure outlet of one to the high pressure outlet of another, they won't work at all if they are the same type of pump. They'll fight each other to a standstill and no water will move since they're trying to push it in opposite directions
  Comment by Thelmara: They alternate because the batteries are intended to be connected "in series" - the 'plus' end of one to the 'minus' end of the next.  If you're laying batteries flat like this, the easy way to connect plus to minus is to just use a short connector to bridge the gap (the [---] in the picture below).


(the * is where the circuit connects to the rest of the device)

            [---]
    ---------------------
    |   *   -   +   *   |
    |                   |
    |                   |
    |                   |
    |                   |
    |                   |
    |   -   +   -   +   |
    ---------------------
        [---]   [---]

If you put all the plus ends next to each other, you'd have to run the connector all the way down the length of the battery case to make the connections work the same way.
  Comment by TehWildMan_: It's less expensive to build that way, since the conductor between cells only has to run between two adjacent cells rather than running the length of each cell.
  Comment by lostcheshire: Imagine putting two batteries into a flashlight or a remote with one long battery compartment. They both go in facing the same way, right? 

Now imagine you want a smaller form factor so you bend that long battery tube into a horseshoe. Now the batteries are facing opposite ways. That’s what’s happening in the side by side remote.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Why can the skin on the sides of fingernails/toenails be cut or scraped off without bleeding/pain?
Author: a-horse-has-no-name
Score: 3
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rffw2/eli5_why_can_the_skin_on_the_sides_of/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by -AproposOfNothing: They are essentially dead tissue with no nerve endings or blood supply. 

To feel pain there has to be damage to your nerves and for there be blood, blood vessels need to be damaged also.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: Eli5: If the main thing that caffeine does is block "you feel tired" chemicals from binding, why does it seem so helpful for morning alertness?
Author: Kirushi
Score: 362
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rf3a7/eli5_if_the_main_thing_that_caffeine_does_is/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by iohognbdfh11: Caffiene doesn't just block the "tired chemicals". It is a CNS stimulant and will increase alertness and reaction time regardless of when it is consumed.
  Comment by Ansuz07: Caffeine blocks adenosine receptors.  Adenosine build up is what makes you feel tired.

Overnight, you purge the built up adenosine from the day, but you don't purge _all_ of it - there is still some residual adenosine in your system when you wake up in the morning.  When you drink coffee in the morning, you block the remaining adenosine in your system, contributing to initial alertness.

For this reason, most doctors will tell you to wait at least an hour before your first cup of coffee.
  Comment by jinxykatte: I mean I am always dehydrated in the morning. It's probably partly cos you are also drinking water.
  Comment by drinkcheapbeer: AND why do i feel like i'm having a heart attack if i drink too much/ too strong/ too fast?
  Comment by jaiagreen: One of the other things caffeine does is make the brain more sensitive to its own dopamine. This can help with focus, responsiveness to rewards, and even physical movement.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: How can you measure mass without gravity?
Author: gloveactually
Score: 8
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rf2lu/eli5_how_can_you_measure_mass_without_gravity/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by ALLCAPS-ONLY: Force = mass x acceleration

Therefore: Mass = Force / Acceleration

So if you apply a known force to an object and measure its acceleration, you can easily find out its mass.

edit: Ok so I was curious and looked up how they actually do it in space, they do it in a few different ways: 

For humans, they either pull the astronaut with a spring over a meter and measure their acceleration with cameras, or have them strapped to a springy table and see how many times they bounce in a given timeframe. Both of these methods apply a known force with a spring and measure the acceleration to work out the mass. 

For smaller objects such as plants, they do the opposite; they apply a known acceleration and measure the force. They put the object in box, into a machine which accelerates it in a controlled way and measure the force the box applies when colliding with the opposite side.
  Comment by Phage0070: If you don't have gravity then you need to add your own acceleration force to measure mass. One mechanism I read about used tuned springs and jiggled the object to be tested, in essence measuring mass from the momentum of the object when propelled by a known force.
  Comment by r2k-in-the-vortex: Doesn't have to be gravity, you can supply any other acceleration and it works the same. On ISS they use spring based scales. Period of oscillation, mass and spring constant relate [like so](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_harmonic_motion#Mass_on_a_spring).

Or you could use a regular scale in a centrifuge.
  Comment by HolidayFew4404: A simple way is to use a spring with known strength and measure the oscillation period. 

The force from a spring is F= -k x with k being the springs strength and x being the displacement from equilibrium. You now fasten a mas M to the spring and displace it. The mass will obey Newtons 2’nd law Ma=-kx. This has the (simplified notation) solution x ~ sin(w t) with where the frequency is w=sqrt(k/M)

Edit: typo
  Comment by Nichigan90: You’re confusing mass and weight. Weight is a function of gravity, mass is not. Mass is just a measure of inertia, it has nothing to do with gravity.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: How do you calculate the probability of getting Y number of same faces with X dice rolls?
Author: Aquablast1
Score: 21
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rejno/eli5_how_do_you_calculate_the_probability_of/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by rotmgNessieeNess: This is not a trivial question and I think you will likely get many wrong or incomplete answers. Here is an earlier discussion about the same issue

https://www.reddit.com/r/learnmath/comments/11ytz9l/chance_of_getting_at_least_x_same_faces_for_n/
  Comment by svmydlo: Seems like people are still answering questions that are not your question.

For clarity, I will call the faces of a die a,b,c,d,e,f instead of 1,2,3,4,5,6. I trust you see that this doesn't change anything about the probability you're asking about. Otherwise says so.

In your example of rolling 10 dice and calculating the probability that there will exist three dice displaying the same face I would try to calculate the complementary probability (that your situation doesn't happen) in the following way. 

First, some notation. Count the number of appearances of each possible face in the result and write it as an ordered sextuple. For example, if the throw was a,b,b,c,c,d,e,e,f,f, I would assign to it a sextuple (1,2,2,1,2,2), becaus there is one "a" face, two "b" faces, two "c" faces, one "d" face, two "e" faces, two "f" faces. If the throw was a,b,a,b,c,d,f,c,d,f, the assigned sextuple would be (2,2,2,2,0,2), because the fifth possible face, the "e", appeared 0 times, but all others twice. Let's call this ordered sextuple a signature (I just made up a word, not meant to be related to anything).

Now, we make two observations. For any throw of 10 dice the sum of the numbers in its signature will be 10. Any throw that does not have at least three dice displaying the same face will have a signature consisting of only numbers 0,1,2.

We can describe all such possible signatures by thinking of possible ways of partitioning number 10 into 6 summands each of which is 0,1, or 2. The partitions are 2+2+2+2+2+0 or 2+2+2+2+1+1. The first partition will give us six different signatures and the second will give us fifteen.

For each signature we can count the number of throws with that specific signature using [multinomial coefficients](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multinomial_theorem#Multinomial_coefficients). For signature (2,2,2,2,2,0) the number of throws with that signature is given by the multinomial coefficient [({10} over {2,2,2,2,2,0})](https://www.wolframalpha.com/input?i=multinomial%5B2%2C2%2C2%2C2%2C2%2C0%5D). That will be the same for all six signatures arising from that partition. For signature (2,2,2,2,1,1) the number of throws with that signature is given by the multinomial coefficient[({10} over {2,2,2,2,1,1})](https://www.wolframalpha.com/input?i=multinomial%5B2%2C2%2C2%2C2%2C1%2C1%5D) and that will be the same for each of the fifteen signatures with the same partition. Thus there is about [4 million](https://www.wolframalpha.com/input?i=6*multinomial%5B2%2C2%2C2%2C2%2C2%2C0%5D%2B15*multinomial%5B2%2C2%2C2%2C2%2C1%2C1%5D) different throws of 10 dice where no three dice have the same face. The probability of that happening is given by diving that number by the number of all possible throws, 6\^10. That's around 6.75%. Thus the answer to your original question in this case is around [93%](https://www.wolframalpha.com/input?i=1-%286*multinomial%5B2%2C2%2C2%2C2%2C2%2C0%5D%2B15*multinomial%5B2%2C2%2C2%2C2%2C1%2C1%5D%29%2F6%5E10).
  Comment by rlbond86: It's actually a fairly complicated formula. Honestly it's easier to just write a short python script and loop through all of the dice combinations, counting which ones match your criteria (assuming you can code).
  Comment by braindeadzombie: It’s easier if you work out the chances of not getting two (or is it at least two) faced the same. 

Roll second die. Chances second one is not the same is 5/6. Roll a third die, chances it’s not the same as 1 or 2 is 4/6. And so on. 1-(5/6*4/6 …). 

1-(chances of not two the same)= chances of two the same.
  Comment by zekromNLR: The general idea is to make a list of all the ways that the event you are looking at can happen, and compare the number of ways to the total number of different outcomes.

For rolling six six-sided dice, the total number of outcomes is 6^(6), 46656. For at least three being the same, it's a bit more complicated, because you have to consider 4, 5 etc being all the same as well. You will be looking for the number of ways that x of the same number and y of any other number can be arranged (mathematically, you will call this "x+y choose x"). And then, for each number of equal dice, you multiply this number of combinations with 5^(number of non-equal dice), since each of the non-equal dice has five different ways of not being equal to the others.

For your example with six dice, this leads to the following table:



Number of same dice | Number of ways to occur | Percentage chance
---|---|----
3 | 2500 | 5.4%
4 | 375 | 0.8%
5 | 30 | 0.064%
6 | 1 | 0.0021%
Total | 2906 | 6.2%

--------------------------------------------------

Title: eli5 why speakers of different languages refer to animal sounds differently
Author: bigern00
Score: 14
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rec3s/eli5_why_speakers_of_different_languages_refer_to/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by KaptenNicco123: We can't perfectly replicate animal sounds, so we approximate. The French just approximated it differently than the English did. All onomatopoeias are approximated in this way.
  Comment by SnowDemonAkuma: Human speech is made up of little building blocks called phonemes, which are discrete noises the human mouth can produce. The human body is capable of producing about eight hundred of these noises, but every language uses a much smaller library of noises.

As we get older, we lose the ability to easily produce or recognise phonemes we don't use in everyday speech. We also keep a few dozen phonemes that aren't used in everyday speech because they're easy to make by mixing other phonemes.

When it comes to onomatopoeias, we only use phonemes that we're familiar with. We approximate the noise into the noises we're capable of making. Each language has different phonemes, so each language ends up approximating noises like animal sounds differently.

Over time, each onomatopoeia becomes the 'official' word to describe a sound, so it sticks around in the language, and everyone who speaks that language uses it. Sometimes this winds up with a language that has phonemes it only uses in onomatopoeias!
  Comment by DanskFrenchMan: Wait till you hear about the Danish noise. We say Raps raps for duck sounds. And oeuf oeuf for pigs.
  Comment by Guroburov: I liked my Japanese lab TA who said she made fun of her American friends for saying dogs go bow wow. Dogs go wung wung. Then on her 1st trip to the US she saw a dog but its bark sounded like bow wow. It was an eye opener for her.
  Comment by IntelHDGramphics: Just you wait to see the Japanese onomatopoeia. Moku moku to eat, kon kon for the sound of a fox , san san for the sound of sun

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5:what is the significance of Jewels in automatic/manual Mechanical watches
Author: FN_Fal_L1A1
Score: 86
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18reahn/eli5what_is_the_significance_of_jewels_in/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by Phage0070: They are used as bearings. Mechanical watches have a lot of moving parts, gears and levers, and friction is a constant loss of energy. The jewels are very smooth and have low friction so the watch can run for a longer time.
  Comment by javanator999: The jewels are used as bearings where things are moving. If you use oil to lubricate the moving parts, it will gum up eventually. By using a tiny piece of gem with a dimple in it for the steel shaft to fit into, you can get very low friction that doesn't gum up or wear out.
  Comment by fishbiscuit13: To add on to the answers about the utility of jewel bearings, the *number* of jewels implies the level of complexity of the inner workings, usually supporting additional complications (features such as date, GMT time tracking, chronograph, etc).
  Comment by TomChai: Back in the days when mechanical watches are practical instruments, the jewel bearings also can't be manufacturerd easily because synthetic ruby wasn't a thing. Natural rubies have to be used and the tooling also isn't that advanced, it's difficult to get the rubies machined properly.

This drives the costs of jewel bearings up. A watch movement with more jewels means it's better designed and built, they will last much longer because the bearings don't wear down at all and if the watch is oiled periodically, the pivots also don't wear down. Premium mechanical watches with jewel bearings in all friction surfaces can easily last for decades if maintained properly, while cheap mechanical watches like early Timex ones can't simply because the pivot bearings and escapement teeth aren't made with jewel bearings and just wear down.

Now the cost of ruby bearings are way down and mechanical watches are luxury art items, the cost incentive to skim on bearings is minimized and probably actually works in the other direction. This makes jewel bearings everywhere and the amount of jewels means there are more mechanisms for premium features(called complications in watchmaking terms) are present.
  Comment by MasterBendu: As many others have said, jewels are used as bearings. 

With the smallest amount of oil, these jewels allow parts that move constantly to keep moving with the least friction and wear. That’s quite important for a machine that needs to be consistent and last a long time.

The question now is, why do they count it?

The jewels in a watch today are synthetic gemstones (rubies). They don’t really cost that much. But back then, you had to use real gemstones.

So advertising the number of jewels shows the buyer several things:

- no cost was spared in making the watch
- the watch is well made, with as many moving parts as frictionless as possible
- the timepiece is more complex or has more features

And there’s actually another one - this watch has a lot of precious gemstones.

There used to be watches that had much higher jewel counts that were just there.

Eventually it became a “rule” that you can only count jewels that actually have a function in the movement; decorative jewels don’t count.

And that’s why a typical watch will have under 30 jewels - that’s all the jewel parts you need to assemble the most common movement designs.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5: Why is it harder to build muscles on the forearm compared to other body parts?
Author: Fluffy_MrSheep
Score: 523
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18re79u/eli5_why_is_it_harder_to_build_muscles_on_the/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by kid_dynamite_bfr: One aspect of this is the muscles in the forearm are smaller than, say, upper arm, and depending on the angle even a well developed forearm can look small. Everyone can have big biceps but having thick forearms are more insertion dependent. 

Add that most people don’t work the forearm much.
  Comment by None: [removed]
  Comment by Wyand1337: Okay, so if you look at people who do rock climbing even somewhat serious, they all tend to have massive forearms before anything else.

Besides the actual climbing, there is specific training done on finger boards which more or less all revolve around dead hangs with added weight on small edges that limit the pull to the last pads of the fingers. What they train is the strength to flex the fingers. Athletes eventually dead hang on one hand off an ede smaller that 20mm in depth, which is significantly harder than just dead hanging with one arm on a bar (that is childs play and a stable shoulder is the limiting factor as opposed to grip strength).

There are other tools to train the same kind of strength, which might be more applicable to a regular gym. You can replace the hangboard with a lifting edge, which is essentially the same tool but for dead lifting weights with one hand. Training protocols are similar for both. Again, this is very different from dead lifting a bar. It's about maximum engagememt through the fingers and limiting the grip to the last pads on the finger basically maximizes joint torque (and mimics climbing) and therefore force through the muscle. Notice that you might not feel any pump before muscle failure setting in on this kind of training and it is very tough on connective tissue, namely pulleys in your fingers and tendons attaching to the elbow.

There is also pinch strength and strength for hand jamming which are a bit different, but whatever.

The issue with your normal exercise is likely the fact that it's not really demanding in terms of finger flexion.

Eli5 on why your forearms don't grow: Because you don't challenge them.
  Comment by neverknowbest: Go to a bouldering gym for 6 months and that’ll change. It’s just a muscle group that gym bros don’t workout.
  Comment by hiricinee: The forearms aren't designed for massive explosive movements, there's no large joint for them to use.  The "big" muscles get huge joints for leverage to do their movements- your biceps through your elbow, quads through your knees, pecs and deltoids through your shoulders, to name a few.   Your forarms are in charge of your wrist and your fingers, and given the VERY limited range of motion relative to the other joints, the forearms don't have to be strong.

--------------------------------------------------

Title: ELI5 : can energy ever be transferred completely
Author: Curious_Bear_
Score: 0
URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/18rde3a/eli5_can_energy_ever_be_transferred_completely/

Fetching 5 comments for this post:
  Comment by nesquikchocolate: It is not possible to convert all energy from one form directly into only one other form and have all of it be usable. 

When an object hits another object, materials on both sides will deform, which will heat them up and cause cracks - both of which cannot become useful energy again.

The closest we can get to 100% efficient transfer is using a resistive heating element in a drum of water for heating that water - this can be 99% efficient. The 1% is usually heat lost in the wire going to the element, which doesn't heat the water and is not useful.

Eventually, all processes that convert one form of energy into another will have heat as a byproduct - this is directly from friction, but also sound and light being made, which then indirectly becomes heat later - and it's very difficult to convert low levels of heat into something useful like electricity.
  Comment by Northern64: Yes, always, and not in the way you want.

Let's imagine 2 identical cars, one stationary and one going 70km/h. When they collide a perfect transfer would have the moving car halt, and the other instantaneously go as fast as the impact speed (70km/h), but that's not what happens when cars collide. There's loud crunching sounds, the cars bend and break, they bounce, and do all kinds of things that aren't stopping or going, and all of that takes energy.

To make it better we can imagine billiards balls rolling into one another. The cue rolls into the 8 and stops on the spot with a loud clack, and the 8 is off rolling towards the pocket almost as fast as when it was hit... Almost. That sound needed energy, and the felt on the table is brushed backwards under the cue where friction moved the fibres, that used up some of it too!

What if there was no air to create resistance. A total vacuum so there's no air. No gravity so we can get rid of the surface and the issues friction causes. Two dense, solid spheres colliding. It still wouldn't be perfect, and you'd need very accurate equipment to see it, but the objects themselves would be heated ever so slightly from the collision meaning some of the velocity was lost as heat.

The energy has to go somewhere, it never just goes away, but it's getting converted into all kinds of byproducts. Light, sound, and heat
  Comment by Doonot: No, when energy transfers from one object to another, some energy will always be lost. The energy still exists but it is no longer usable.
  Comment by See_Bee10: Theoretically yes in the same sense that it is possible to roll ten trillion fair dice and have them all come up with a 1. Imagine a ball suspended in water. Think of the water and the ball each having packets of energy that represent the heat inside them. Over a period of time the heat packets will flow from the water to the ball and vice versa. It is possible that in a given period of time all the packets would travel outside of the ball and into the water, while none of the packets would enter the ball, but the odds of it ever happening is basically zero.

The ten trillion dice is actually vastly more likely than two macroscopic objects interacting and having perfect energy transfer.
  Comment by DestinTheLion: I think this might be the second law of thermodynamics

--------------------------------------------------
